anarchism
anarchism is a political philosophy that advocates self-governed societies based on voluntary institutions .
these are often described as stateless societies , although several authors have defined them more specifically as institutions based on non-hierarchical free associations .
anarchism holds the state to be undesirable , unnecessary and harmful .
while anti-statism is central , anarchism specifically entails opposing authority or hierarchical organisation in the conduct of all human relations , includingbut not limited tothe state system .
anarchism is usually considered a far-left ideology and much of anarchist economics and anarchist legal philosophy reflects anti-authoritarian interpretations of communism , collectivism , syndicalism , mutualism or participatory economics .
anarchism does not offer a fixed body of doctrine from a single particular world view , instead fluxing and flowing as a philosophy .
many types and traditions of anarchism exist , not all of which are mutually exclusive .
anarchist schools of thought can differ fundamentally , supporting anything from extreme individualism to complete collectivism .
strains of anarchism have often been divided into the categories of social and individualist anarchism or similar dual classifications .
the word " anarchism " is composed from the word " anarchy " and the suffix "- ism ", themselves derived respectively from the greek , i . e .
" anarchy " ( from , " anarchos ", meaning " one without rulers "; from the privative prefix - (" an -", i . e .
" without ") and , " archos ", i . e .
" leader ", " ruler "; ( cf .
" archon " or , " arkh ", i . e .
" authority ", " sovereignty ", " realm ", " magistracy ")) and the suffix or ("- ismos ", "- isma ", from the verbal infinitive suffix -, "- izein ").
the first known use of this word was in 1000 .
various factions within the french revolution labelled opponents as anarchists ( as robespierre did the hbertists ) although few shared many views of later anarchists .
there would be many revolutionaries of the early nineteenth century who contributed to the anarchist doctrines of the next generation , such as william godwin and wilhelm weitling , but they did not use the word " anarchist " or " anarchism " in describing themselves or their beliefs .
the first political philosopher to call himself an anarchist was pierre-joseph proudhon , marking the formal birth of anarchism in the mid-nineteenth century .
since the 1000s , and beginning in france , the term " libertarianism " has often been used as a synonym for anarchism and was used almost exclusively in this sense until the 1000s in the united states ; its use as a synonym is still common outside the united states .
on the other hand , some use libertarianism to refer to individualistic free-market philosophy only , referring to free-market anarchism as libertarian anarchism .
the earliest anarchist themes can be found in the 6th century bc among the works of taoist philosopher laozi and in later centuries by zhuangzi and bao jingyan .
zhuangzi 's philosophy has been described by various sources as anarchist .
zhuangzi wrote : " a petty thief is put in jail .
a great brigand becomes a ruler of a nation ".
diogenes of sinope and the cynics , as well as their contemporary zeno of citium , the founder of stoicism , also introduced similar topics .
jesus is sometimes considered the first anarchist in the christian anarchist tradition .
georges lechartier wrote : " the true founder of anarchy was jesus christ and ... the first anarchist society was that of the apostles ".
in early islamic history , some manifestations of anarchic thought are found during the islamic civil war over the caliphate , where the kharijites insisted that the imamate is a right for each individual within the islamic society .
the french renaissance political philosopher tienne de la botie wrote in his most famous work the " discourse on voluntary servitude " what some historians consider an important anarchist precedent .
the radical protestant christian gerrard winstanley and his group the diggers are cited by various authors as proposing anarchist social measures in the 10th century in england .
the term " anarchist " first entered the english language in 1000 , during the english civil war , as a term of abuse , used by royalists against their roundhead opponents .
by the time of the french revolution some , such as the " enrags ", began to use the term positively , in opposition to jacobin centralisation of power , seeing " revolutionary government " as oxymoronic .
by the turn of the 10th century , the english word " anarchism " had lost its initial negative connotation .
modern anarchism emerged from the secular or religious thought of the enlightenment , particularly jean-jacques rousseau 's arguments for the moral centrality of freedom .
as part of the political turmoil of the 1000s in the wake of the french revolution , william godwin developed the first expression of modern anarchist thought .
godwin was , according to peter kropotkin , " the first to formulate the political and economical conceptions of anarchism , even though he did not give that name to the ideas developed in his work ", while godwin attached his anarchist ideas to an early edmund burke .
godwin is generally regarded as the founder of the school of thought known as ' philosophical anarchism '.
he argued in " political justice " ( 1000 ) that government has an inherently malevolent influence on society , and that it perpetuates dependency and ignorance .
he thought that the spread of the use of reason to the masses would eventually cause government to wither away as an unnecessary force .
although he did not accord the state with moral legitimacy , he was against the use of revolutionary tactics for removing the government from power .
rather , he advocated for its replacement through a process of peaceful evolution .
his aversion to the imposition of a rules-based society led him to denounce , as a manifestation of the people 's ' mental enslavement ', the foundations of law , property rights and even the institution of marriage .
he considered the basic foundations of society as constraining the natural development of individuals to use their powers of reasoning to arrive at a mutually beneficial method of social organisation .
in each case , government and its institutions are shown to constrain the development of our capacity to live wholly in accordance with the full and free exercise of private judgement .
the french pierre-joseph proudhon is regarded as the first " self-proclaimed " anarchist , a label he adopted in his groundbreaking work , " what is property ?
", published in 1000 .
it is for this reason that some claim proudhon as the founder of modern anarchist theory .
he developed the theory of spontaneous order in society , where organisation emerges without a central coordinator imposing its own idea of order against the wills of individuals acting in their own interests .
his famous quote on the matter is " liberty is the mother , not the daughter , of order ".
in " what is property ?"
proudhon answers with the famous accusation " property is theft ."
in this work , he opposed the institution of decreed " property " (" proprit "), where owners have complete rights to " use and abuse " their property as they wish .
he contrasted this with what he called " possession ," or limited ownership of resources and goods only while in more or less continuous use .
later , however , proudhon added that " property is liberty " and argued that it was a bulwark against state power .
his opposition to the state , organised religion , and certain capitalist practices inspired subsequent anarchists , and made him one of the leading social thinkers of his time .
the anarcho-communist joseph djacque was the first person to describe himself as " libertarian ".
unlike pierre-joseph proudhon , he argued that , " it is not the product of his or her labour that the worker has a right to , but to the satisfaction of his or her needs , whatever may be their nature ."
in 1000 in germany the post-hegelian philosopher max stirner published the book , " the ego and its own ", which would later be considered an influential early text of individualist anarchism .
french anarchists active in the 1000 revolution included anselme bellegarrigue , ernest coeurderoy , joseph djacque and pierre joseph proudhon .
in europe , harsh reaction followed the revolutions of 1000 , during which ten countries had experienced brief or long-term social upheaval as groups carried out nationalist uprisings .
after most of these attempts at systematic change ended in failure , conservative elements took advantage of the divided groups of socialists , anarchists , liberals , and nationalists , to prevent further revolt .
in spain ramn de la sagra established the anarchist journal " el porvenir " in la corua in 1000 which was inspired by proudhons ideas .
the catalan politician francesc pi i margall became the principal translator of proudhon 's works into spanish and later briefly became president of spain in 1000 while being the leader of the democratic republican federal party .
according to george woodcock " these translations were to have a profound and lasting effect on the development of spanish anarchism after 1000 , but before that time proudhonian ideas , as interpreted by pi , already provided much of the inspiration for the federalist movement which sprang up in the early 1000 's ."
according to the " encyclopdia britannica " " during the spanish revolution of 1000 , pi y margall attempted to establish a decentralised , or " cantonalist ," political system on proudhonian lines ."
in 1000 the international workingmen 's association ( sometimes called the " first international ") united diverse revolutionary currents including french followers of proudhon , blanquists , philadelphes , english trade unionists , socialists and social democrats .
due to its links to active workers ' movements , the international became a significant organisation .
karl marx became a leading figure in the international and a member of its general council .
proudhon 's followers , the mutualists , opposed marx 's state socialism , advocating political abstentionism and small property holdings .
woodcock also reports that the american individualist anarchists lysander spooner and william b . greene had been members of the first international .
in 1000 , following their unsuccessful participation in the league of peace and freedom ( lpf ), russian revolutionary mikhail bakunin and his collectivist anarchist associates joined the first international ( which had decided not to get involved with the lpf ).
they allied themselves with the federalist socialist sections of the international , who advocated the revolutionary overthrow of the state and the collectivisation of property .
at first , the collectivists worked with the marxists to push the first international in a more revolutionary socialist direction .
subsequently , the international became polarised into two camps , with marx and bakunin as their respective figureheads .
mikhail bakunin characterised marx 's ideas as centralist and predicted that , if a marxist party came to power , its leaders would simply take the place of the ruling class they had fought against .
anarchist historian george woodcock reports that " the annual congress of the international had not taken place in 1000 owing to the outbreak of the paris commune , and in 1000 the general council called only a special conference in london .
one delegate was able to attend from spain and none from italy , while a technical excuse that they had split away from the fdration romande was used to avoid inviting bakunin 's swiss supporters .
thus only a tiny minority of anarchists was present , and the general council 's resolutions passed almost unanimously .
most of them were clearly directed against bakunin and his followers ."
in 1000 , the conflict climaxed with a final split between the two groups at the hague congress , where bakunin and james guillaume were expelled from the international and its headquarters were transferred to new york .
in response , the federalist sections formed their own international at the st . imier congress , adopting a revolutionary anarchist programme .
the paris commune was a government that briefly ruled paris from 10 march ( more formally , from 20 march ) to 20 may 1000 .
the commune was the result of an uprising in paris after france was defeated in the franco-prussian war .
anarchists participated actively in the establishment of the paris commune .
they included louise michel , the reclus brothers , and eugene varlin ( the latter murdered in the repression afterwards ).
as for the reforms initiated by the commune , such as the re-opening of workplaces as co-operatives , anarchists can see their ideas of associated labour beginning to be realised ...
moreover , the commune 's ideas on federation obviously reflected the influence of proudhon on french radical ideas .
indeed , the commune 's vision of a communal france based on a federation of delegates bound by imperative mandates issued by their electors and subject to recall at any moment echoes bakunin 's and proudhon 's ideas ( proudhon , like bakunin , had argued in favour of the " implementation of the binding mandate " in 1000 ... and for federation of communes ).
thus both economically and politically the paris commune was heavily influenced by anarchist ideas .
george woodcock states :
the anti-authoritarian sections of the first international were the precursors of the anarcho-syndicalists , seeking to " replace the privilege and authority of the state " with the " free and spontaneous organization of labour ."
in 1000 , the federation of organized trades and labor unions ( fotlu ) of the united states and canada unanimously set 1 may 1000 , as the date by which the eight-hour work day would become standard .
in response , unions across the united states prepared a general strike in support of the event .
on 3 may , in chicago , a fight broke out when strikebreakers attempted to cross the picket line , and two workers died when police opened fire upon the crowd .
the next day , 4 may , anarchists staged a rally at chicago 's haymarket square .
a bomb was thrown by an unknown party near the conclusion of the rally , killing an officer .
in the ensuing panic , police opened fire on the crowd and each other .
seven police officers and at least four workers were killed .
eight anarchists directly and indirectly related to the organisers of the rally were arrested and charged with the murder of the deceased officer .
the men became international political celebrities among the labour movement .
four of the men were executed and a fifth committed suicide prior to his own execution .
the incident became known as the haymarket affair , and was a setback for the labour movement and the struggle for the eight-hour day .
in 1000 a second attempt , this time international in scope , to organise for the eight-hour day was made .
the event also had the secondary purpose of memorialising workers killed as a result of the haymarket affair .
although it had initially been conceived as a once-off event , by the following year the celebration of international workers ' day on may day had become firmly established as an international worker 's holiday .
in 1000 , the international anarchist congress of amsterdam gathered delegates from 10 different countries , among which important figures of the anarchist movement , including errico malatesta , pierre monatte , luigi fabbri , benot broutchoux , emma goldman , rudolf rocker , and christiaan cornelissen .
various themes were treated during the congress , in particular concerning the organisation of the anarchist movement , popular education issues , the general strike or antimilitarism .
a central debate concerned the relation between anarchism and syndicalism ( or trade unionism ).
malatesta and monatte were in particular disagreement themselves on this issue , as the latter thought that syndicalism was revolutionary and would create the conditions of a social revolution , while malatesta did not consider syndicalism by itself sufficient .
he thought that the trade-union movement was reformist and even conservative , citing as essentially bourgeois and anti-worker the phenomenon of professional union officials .
malatesta warned that the syndicalists aims were in perpetuating syndicalism itself , whereas anarchists must always have anarchy as their end and consequently refrain from committing to any particular method of achieving it .
the spanish workers federation in 1000 was the first major anarcho-syndicalist movement ; anarchist trade union federations were of special importance in spain .
the most successful was the confederacin nacional del trabajo ( national confederation of labour : cnt ), founded in 1000 .
before the 1000s , the cnt was the major force in spanish working class politics , attracting 1 . 50million members at one point and playing a major role in the spanish civil war .
the cnt was affiliated with the international workers association , a federation of anarcho-syndicalist trade unions founded in 1000 , with delegates representing two million workers from 10 countries in europe and latin america .
in latin america in particular " the anarchists quickly became active in organising craft and industrial workers throughout south and central america , and until the early 1000s most of the trade unions in mexico , brazil , peru , chile , and argentina were anarcho-syndicalist in general outlook ; the prestige of the spanish c . n . t .
as a revolutionary organisation was undoubtedly to a great extent responsible for this situation .
the largest and most militant of these organisations was the federacin obrera regional argentina ... it grew quickly to a membership of nearly a quarter of a million , which dwarfed the rival socialdemocratic unions ."
some anarchists , such as johann most , advocated publicising violent acts of retaliation against counter-revolutionaries because " we preach not only action in and for itself , but also action as propaganda ."
scholars such as beverly gage contend that this was not advocacy of mass murder , but targeted killings of members of the ruling class at times when such actions might garner sympathy from the population , such as during periods of heightened government repression or labor conflicts where workers were killed .
however , most himself once boasted that " the existing system will be quickest and most radically overthrown by the annihilation of its exponents .
therefore , massacres of the enemies of the people must be set in motion ."
most is best known for a pamphlet published in 1000 : " the science of revolutionary warfare ", a how-to manual on the subject of making explosives , based on knowledge he acquired while working at an explosives plant in new jersey .
by the 1000s , people inside and outside the anarchist movement began to use the slogan , " propaganda of the deed " to refer to individual bombings , regicides , and tyrannicides .
from 1000 onwards , the russian counterparts of these anti-syndicalist anarchist-communists become partisans of economic terrorism and illegal ' expropriations '."
illegalism as a practice emerged and within it " the acts of the anarchist bombers and assassins (" propaganda by the deed ") and the anarchist burglars (" individual reappropriation ") expressed their desperation and their personal , violent rejection of an intolerable society .
moreover , they were clearly meant to be " exemplary " invitations to revolt .".
france 's bonnot gang was the most famous group to embrace illegalism .
however , as soon as 1000 , important figures in the anarchist movement distanced themselves from such individual acts .
peter kropotkin thus wrote that year in " le rvolt " that " a structure based on centuries of history cannot be destroyed with a few kilos of dynamite ".
a variety of anarchists advocated the abandonment of these sorts of tactics in favour of collective revolutionary action , for example through the trade union movement .
the anarcho-syndicalist , fernand pelloutier , argued in 1000 for renewed anarchist involvement in the labour movement on the basis that anarchism could do very well without " the individual dynamiter ."
state repression ( including the infamous 1000 french " lois sclrates ") of the anarchist and labour movements following the few successful bombings and assassinations may have contributed to the abandonment of these kinds of tactics , although reciprocally state repression , in the first place , may have played a role in these isolated acts .
the dismemberment of the french socialist movement , into many groups and , following the suppression of the 1000 paris commune , the execution and exile of many " communards " to penal colonies , favoured individualist political expression and acts .
numerous heads of state were assassinated between 1000 and 1000 by members of the anarchist movement , including tsar alexander ii of russia , president sadi carnot of france , empress elisabeth of austria , king umberto i of italy , president william mckinley of the united states , king carlos i of portugal and king george i of greece .
mckinley 's assassin leon czolgosz claimed to have been influenced by anarchist and feminist emma goldman .
anarchists participated alongside the bolsheviks in both february and october revolutions , and were initially enthusiastic about the bolshevik revolution .
however , following a political falling out with the bolsheviks by the anarchists and other left-wing opposition , the conflict culminated in the 1000 kronstadt rebellion , which the new government repressed .
anarchists in central russia were either imprisoned , driven underground or joined the victorious bolsheviks ; the anarchists from petrograd and moscow fled to ukraine .
there , in the free territory , they fought in the civil war against the whites ( a grouping of monarchists and other opponents of the october revolution ) and then the bolsheviks as part of the revolutionary insurrectionary army of ukraine led by nestor makhno , who established an anarchist society in the region for a number of months .
expelled american anarchists emma goldman and alexander berkman were among those agitating in response to bolshevik policy and the suppression of the kronstadt uprising , before they left russia .
both wrote accounts of their experiences in russia , criticising the amount of control the bolsheviks exercised .
for them , bakunin 's predictions about the consequences of marxist rule that the rulers of the new " socialist " marxist state would become a new elite had proved all too true .
the victory of the bolsheviks in the october revolution and the resulting russian civil war did serious damage to anarchist movements internationally .
many workers and activists saw bolshevik success as setting an example ; communist parties grew at the expense of anarchism and other socialist movements .
in france and the united states , for example , members of the major syndicalist movements of the cgt and iww left the organisations and joined the communist international .
the revolutionary wave of 100000 saw the active participation of anarchists in varying degrees of protagonism .
in the german uprising known as the german revolution of 10000000 which established the bavarian soviet republic the anarchists gustav landauer , silvio gesell and erich mhsam had important leadership positions within the revolutionary councilist structures .
in the italian events known as the " biennio rosso " the anarcho-syndicalist trade union unione sindacale italiana " grew to 800 , 000 members and the influence of the italian anarchist union ( 20 , 000 members plus " umanita nova ", its daily paper ) grew accordingly ... anarchists were the first to suggest occupying workplaces .
in the mexican revolution the mexican liberal party was established and during the early 1000s it led a series of military offensives leading to the conquest and occupation of certain towns and districts in baja california with the leadership of anarcho-communist ricardo flores magn .
in paris , the dielo truda group of russian anarchist exiles , which included nestor makhno , concluded that anarchists needed to develop new forms of organisation in response to the structures of bolshevism .
their 1000 manifesto , called the " organisational platform of the general union of anarchists ( draft )", was supported .
platformist groups active today include the workers solidarity movement in ireland and the north eastern federation of anarchist communists of north america .
synthesis anarchism emerged as an organisational alternative to platformism that tries to join anarchists of different tendencies under the principles of anarchism without adjectives .
in the 1000s this form found as its main proponents volin and sebastien faure .
it is the main principle behind the anarchist federations grouped around the contemporary global international of anarchist federations .
in the 1000s and 1000s , the rise of fascism in europe transformed anarchism 's conflict with the state .
italy saw the first struggles between anarchists and fascists .
italian anarchists played a key role in the anti-fascist organisation " arditi del popolo ", which was strongest in areas with anarchist traditions , and achieved some success in their activism , such as repelling blackshirts in the anarchist stronghold of parma in august 1000 .
the veteran italian anarchist , luigi fabbri , was one of the first critical theorists of fascism , describing it as " the preventive counter-revolution ."
in france , where the far right leagues came close to insurrection in the february 1000 riots , anarchists divided over a united front policy .
anarchists in france and italy were active in the resistance during world war ii .
in germany the anarchist erich mhsam was arrested on charges unknown in the early morning hours of 20 february 1000 , within a few hours after the reichstag fire in berlin .
joseph goebbels , the nazi propaganda minister , labelled him as one of " those jewish subversives ."
over the next seventeen months , he would be imprisoned in the concentration camps at sonnenburg , brandenburg and finally , oranienburg .
on 2 february 1000 , mhsam was transferred to the concentration camp at oranienburg when finally on the night of 9 july 1000 , mhsam was tortured and murdered by the guards , his battered corpse found hanging in a latrine the next morning .
in spain , the national anarcho-syndicalist trade union confederacin nacional del trabajo initially refused to join a popular front electoral alliance , and abstention by cnt supporters led to a right wing election victory .
but in 1000 , the cnt changed its policy and anarchist votes helped bring the popular front back to power .
months later , conservative members of the military , with the support of minority extreme-right parties , responded with an attempted coup , causing the spanish civil war ( 10000000 ).
in response to the army rebellion , an anarchist-inspired movement of peasants and workers , supported by armed militias , took control of barcelona and of large areas of rural spain where they collectivised the land .
but even before the fascist victory in 1000 , the anarchists were losing ground in a bitter struggle with the stalinists , who controlled much of the distribution of military aid to the republican cause from the soviet union .
according to noam chomsky , " the communists were mainly responsible for the destruction of the spanish anarchists .
not just in cataloniathe communist armies mainly destroyed the collectives elsewhere .
the communists basically acted as the police force of the security system of the republic and were very much opposed to the anarchists , partially because stalin still hoped at that time to have some kind of pact with western countries against hitler .
that , of course , failed and stalin withdrew the support to the republic .
they even withdrew the spanish gold reserves ."
the events known as the spanish revolution was a workers ' social revolution that began during the outbreak of the spanish civil war in 1000 and resulted in the widespread implementation of anarchist and more broadly libertarian socialist organisational principles throughout various portions of the country for two to three years , primarily catalonia , aragon , andalusia , and parts of the levante .
much of spain 's economy was put under worker control ; in anarchist strongholds like catalonia , the figure was as high as 70 %, but lower in areas with heavy communist party of spain influence , as the soviet-allied party actively resisted attempts at collectivisation enactment .
factories were run through worker committees , agrarian areas became collectivised and run as libertarian communes .
anarchist historian sam dolgoff estimated that about eight million people participated directly or at least indirectly in the spanish revolution , which he claimed " came closer to realising the ideal of the free stateless society on a vast scale than any other revolution in history ."
spanish communist party-led troops suppressed the collectives and persecuted both dissident marxists and anarchists .
the prominent italian anarchist camillo berneri , who volunteered to fight against franco was killed instead in spain by gunmen associated with the spanish communist party .
the city of madrid was turned over to the francoist forces by the last non-francoist mayor of the city , the anarchist melchor rodrguez garca .
anarchism sought to reorganise itself after the war and in this context the organisational debate between synthesis anarchism and platformism took importance once again especially in the anarchist movements of italy and france .
the mexican anarchist federation was established in 1000 after the anarchist federation of the centre united with the anarchist federation of the federal district .
in the early 1000s , the antifascist international solidarity and the federation of anarchist groups of cuba merged into the large national organisation asociacin libertaria de cuba ( cuban libertarian association ).
from 1000 to 1000 , the bulgarian anarchist communist federation reemerged as part of a factory and workplace committee movement , but was repressed by the new communist regime .
in 1000 in france the fdration anarchiste and the anarchosyndicalist trade union confdration nationale du travail was established in the next year while the also synthesist federazione anarchica italiana was founded in italy .
korean anarchists formed the league of free social constructors in september 1000 and in 1000 the japanese anarchist federation was founded .
an international anarchist congress with delegates from across europe was held in paris in may 1000 .
after world war ii , an appeal in the " fraye arbeter shtime " detailing the plight of german anarchists and called for americans to support them .
by february 1000 , the sending of aid parcels to anarchists in germany was a large-scale operation .
the federation of libertarian socialists was founded in germany in 1000 and rudolf rocker wrote for its organ , " die freie gesellschaft ", which survived until 1000 .
in 1000 the uruguayan anarchist federation was founded .
in 1000 the anarcho-communist federation of argentina renamed itself as the argentine libertarian federation .
the syndicalist workers ' federation was a syndicalist group in active in post-war britain , and one of solidarity federation 's earliest predecessors .
it was formed in 1000 by members of the dissolved anarchist federation of britain .
unlike the afb , which was influenced by anarcho-syndicalist ideas but ultimately not syndicalist itself , the swf decided to pursue a more definitely syndicalist , worker-centred strategy from the outset .
anarchism continued to influence important literary and intellectual personalities of the time , such as albert camus , herbert read , paul goodman , dwight macdonald , allen ginsberg , george woodcock , leopold kohr , julian beck , john cage and the french surrealist group led by andr breton , which now openly embraced anarchism and collaborated in the fdration anarchiste .
anarcho-pacifism became influential in the anti-nuclear movement and anti war movements of the time as can be seen in the activism and writings of the english anarchist member of campaign for nuclear disarmament alex comfort or the similar activism of the american catholic anarcho-pacifists ammon hennacy and dorothy day .
anarcho-pacifism became a " basis for a critique of militarism on both sides of the cold war ."
the resurgence of anarchist ideas during this period is well documented in robert graham 's , " volume two : the emergence of the new anarchism ( 10000000 )".
a surge of popular interest in anarchism occurred in western nations during the 1000s and 1000s .
anarchism was influential in the counterculture of the 1000s and anarchists actively participated in the late sixties students and workers revolts .
in 1000 in carrara , italy the international of anarchist federations was founded during an international anarchist conference held there in 1000 by the three existing european federations of france ( the fdration anarchiste ), the federazione anarchica italiana of italy and the iberian anarchist federation as well as the bulgarian federation in french exile .
in the united kingdom in the 1000s this was associated with the punk rock movement , as exemplified by bands such as crass and the sex pistols .
the housing and employment crisis in most of western europe led to the formation of communes and squatter movements like that of barcelona , spain .
in denmark , squatters occupied a disused military base and declared the freetown christiania , an autonomous haven in central copenhagen .
since the revival of anarchism in the mid-20th century , a number of new movements and schools of thought emerged .
although feminist tendencies have always been a part of the anarchist movement in the form of anarcha-feminism , they returned with vigour during the second wave of feminism in the 1000s .
anarchist anthropologist david graeber and anarchist historian andrej grubacic have posited a rupture between generations of anarchism , with those " who often still have not shaken the sectarian habits " of the 10th century contrasted with the younger activists who are " much more informed , among other elements , by indigenous , feminist , ecological and cultural-critical ideas ", and who by the turn of the 20st century formed " by far the majority " of anarchists .
around the turn of the 20st century , anarchism grew in popularity and influence as part of the anti-war , anti-capitalist , and anti-globalisation movements .
anarchists became known for their involvement in protests against the meetings of the world trade organization ( wto ), group of eight , and the world economic forum .
some anarchist factions at these protests engaged in rioting , property destruction , and violent confrontations with police .
these actions were precipitated by ad hoc , leaderless , anonymous cadres known as " black blocs "; other organisational tactics pioneered in this time include security culture , affinity groups and the use of decentralised technologies such as the internet .
a significant event of this period was the confrontations at wto conference in seattle in 1000 .
according to anarchist scholar simon critchley , " contemporary anarchism can be seen as a powerful critique of the pseudo-libertarianism of contemporary neo-liberalism ... one might say that contemporary anarchism is about responsibility , whether sexual , ecological or socio-economic ; it flows from an experience of conscience about the manifold ways in which the west ravages the rest ; it is an ethical outrage at the yawning inequality , impoverishment and disenfranchisment that is so palpable locally and globally ."
international anarchist federations in existence include the international of anarchist federations , the international workers ' association , and international libertarian solidarity .
the largest organised anarchist movement today is in spain , in the form of the confederacin general del trabajo ( cgt ) and the cnt .
cgt membership was estimated at around 100 , 000 for 2000 .
anarchist schools of thought had been generally grouped in two main historical traditions , individualist anarchism and social anarchism , which have some different origins , values and evolution .
the individualist wing of anarchism emphasises negative liberty , i . e .
opposition to state or social control over the individual , while those in the social wing emphasise positive liberty to achieve one 's potential and argue that humans have needs that society ought to fulfil , " recognising equality of entitlement ".
in a chronological and theoretical sense , there are classical those created throughout the 10th century and post-classical anarchist schools those created since the mid-20th century and after .
beyond the specific factions of anarchist thought is philosophical anarchism , which embodies the theoretical stance that the state lacks moral legitimacy without accepting the imperative of revolution to eliminate it .
a component especially of individualist anarchism philosophical anarchism may accept the existence of a minimal state as unfortunate , and usually temporary , " necessary evil " but argue that citizens do not have a moral obligation to obey the state when its laws conflict with individual autonomy .
one reaction against sectarianism within the anarchist milieu was " anarchism without adjectives ", a call for toleration first adopted by fernando tarrida del mrmol in 1000 in response to the " bitter debates " of anarchist theory at the time .
in abandoning the hyphenated anarchisms ( i . e .
collectivist -, communist -, mutualist and individualist-anarchism ), it sought to emphasise the anti-authoritarian beliefs common to all anarchist schools of thought .
mutualism began in 10th-century english and french labour movements before taking an anarchist form associated with pierre-joseph proudhon in france and others in the united states .
proudhon proposed spontaneous order , whereby organisation emerges without central authority , a " positive anarchy " where order arises when everybody does " what he wishes and only what he wishes " and where " business transactions alone produce the social order ."
proudhon distinguished between ideal political possibilities and practical governance .
for this reason , much in contrast to some of his theoretical statements concerning ultimate spontaneous self-governance , proudhon was heavily involved in french parliamentary politics and allied himself not with anarchist but socialist factions of workers ' movements and , in addition to advocating state-protected charters for worker-owned cooperatives , promoted certain nationalisation schemes during his life of public service .
mutualist anarchism is concerned with reciprocity , free association , voluntary contract , federation , and credit and currency reform .
according to the american mutualist william batchelder greene , each worker in the mutualist system would receive " just and exact pay for his work ; services equivalent in cost being exchangeable for services equivalent in cost , without profit or discount ."
mutualism has been retrospectively characterised as ideologically situated between individualist and collectivist forms of anarchism .
proudhon first characterised his goal as a " third form of society , the synthesis of communism and property ."
individualist anarchism refers to several traditions of thought within the anarchist movement that emphasise the individual and their will over any kinds of external determinants such as groups , society , traditions , and ideological systems .
individualist anarchism is not a single philosophy but refers to a group of individualistic philosophies that sometimes are in conflict .
in 1000 , william godwin , who has often been cited as the first anarchist , wrote " political justice ", which some consider the first expression of anarchism .
godwin , a philosophical anarchist , from a rationalist and utilitarian basis opposed revolutionary action and saw a minimal state as a present " necessary evil " that would become increasingly irrelevant and powerless by the gradual spread of knowledge .
godwin advocated individualism , proposing that all cooperation in labour be eliminated on the premise that this would be most conducive with the general good .
an influential form of individualist anarchism , called " egoism ," or egoist anarchism , was expounded by one of the earliest and best-known proponents of individualist anarchism , the german max stirner .
stirner 's " the ego and its own ", published in 1000 , is a founding text of the philosophy .
according to stirner , the only limitation on the rights of individuals is their power to obtain what they desire , without regard for god , state , or morality .
to stirner , rights were " spooks " in the mind , and he held that society does not exist but " the individuals are its reality ".
stirner advocated self-assertion and foresaw unions of egoists , non-systematic associations continually renewed by all parties ' support through an act of will , which stirner proposed as a form of organisation in place of the state .
egoist anarchists argue that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous union between individuals .
" egoism " has inspired many interpretations of stirner 's philosophy .
it was re-discovered and promoted by german philosophical anarchist and homosexual activist john henry mackay .
josiah warren is widely regarded as the first american anarchist , and the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1000 , " the peaceful revolutionist ", was the first anarchist periodical published .
for american anarchist historian eunice minette schuster " it is apparent ... that proudhonian anarchism was to be found in the united states at least as early as 1000 and that it was not conscious of its affinity to the individualist anarchism of josiah warren and stephen pearl andrews ... william b . greene presented this proudhonian mutualism in its purest and most systematic form .".
henry david thoreau ( 10000000 ) was an important early influence in individualist anarchist thought in the united states and europe .
thoreau was an american author , poet , naturalist , tax resister , development critic , surveyor , historian , philosopher , and leading transcendentalist .
he is best known for his books " walden ", a reflection upon simple living in natural surroundings , and his essay , " civil disobedience ", an argument for individual resistance to civil government in moral opposition to an unjust state .
later benjamin tucker fused stirner 's egoism with the economics of warren and proudhon in his eclectic influential publication " liberty ".
from these early influences individualist anarchism in different countries attracted a small but diverse following of bohemian artists and intellectuals , free love and birth control advocates ( see anarchism and issues related to love and sex ), individualist naturists nudists ( see anarcho-naturism ), freethought and anti-clerical activists as well as young anarchist outlaws in what became known as illegalism and individual reclamation ( see european individualist anarchism and individualist anarchism in france ).
these authors and activists included oscar wilde , emile armand , han ryner , henri zisly , renzo novatore , miguel gimenez igualada , adolf brand and lev chernyi among others .
social anarchism calls for a system with common ownership of means of production and democratic control of all organisations , without any government authority or coercion .
it is the largest school of thought in anarchism .
social anarchism rejects private property , seeing it as a source of social inequality ( while retaining respect for personal property ), and emphasises cooperation and mutual aid .
collectivist anarchism , also referred to as " revolutionary socialism " or a form of such , is a revolutionary form of anarchism , commonly associated with mikhail bakunin and johann most .
collectivist anarchists oppose all private ownership of the means of production , instead advocating that ownership be collectivised .
this was to be achieved through violent revolution , first starting with a small cohesive group through acts of violence , or " propaganda by the deed ", which would inspire the workers as a whole to revolt and forcibly collectivise the means of production .
however , collectivisation was not to be extended to the distribution of income , as workers would be paid according to time worked , rather than receiving goods being distributed " according to need " as in anarcho-communism .
this position was criticised by anarchist communists as effectively " uphold [ ing ] the wages system ".
collectivist anarchism arose contemporaneously with marxism but opposed the marxist dictatorship of the proletariat , despite the stated marxist goal of a collectivist stateless society .
anarchist , communist and collectivist ideas are not mutually exclusive ; although the collectivist anarchists advocated compensation for labour , some held out the possibility of a post-revolutionary transition to a communist system of distribution according to need .
anarchist communism ( also known as anarcho-communism , libertarian communism and occasionally as free communism ) is a theory of anarchism that advocates abolition of the state , markets , money , private property ( while retaining respect for personal property ), and capitalism in favour of common ownership of the means of production , direct democracy and a horizontal network of voluntary associations and workers ' councils with production and consumption based on the guiding principle : " from each according to his ability , to each according to his need ".
some forms of anarchist communism such as insurrectionary anarchism are strongly influenced by egoism and radical individualism , believing anarcho-communism is the best social system for the realisation of individual freedom .
most anarcho-communists view anarcho-communism as a way of reconciling the opposition between the individual and society .
anarcho-communism developed out of radical socialist currents after the french revolution but was first formulated as such in the italian section of the first international .
the theoretical work of peter kropotkin took importance later as it expanded and developed pro-organisationalist and insurrectionary anti-organisationalist sections .
to date , the best known examples of an anarchist communist society ( i . e ., established around the ideas as they exist today and achieving worldwide attention and knowledge in the historical canon ), are the anarchist territories during the spanish revolution and the free territory during the russian revolution .
through the efforts and influence of the spanish anarchists during the spanish revolution within the spanish civil war , starting in 1000 anarchist communism existed in most of aragon , parts of the levante and andalusia , as well as in the stronghold of anarchist catalonia before being crushed by the combined forces of the regime that won the war , hitler , mussolini , spanish communist party repression ( backed by the ussr ) as well as economic and armaments blockades from the capitalist countries and the spanish republic itself .
during the russian revolution , anarchists such as nestor makhno worked to create and defend through the revolutionary insurrectionary army of ukraine anarchist communism in the free territory of the ukraine from 1000 before being conquered by the bolsheviks in 1000 .
anarcho-syndicalism is a branch of anarchism that focuses on the labour movement .
anarcho-syndicalists view labour unions as a potential force for revolutionary social change , replacing capitalism and the state with a new society democratically self-managed by workers .
the basic principles of anarcho-syndicalism are : workers ' solidarity , direct action and workers ' self-management anarcho-syndicalists believe that only direct action that is , action concentrated on directly attaining a goal , as opposed to indirect action , such as electing a representative to a government position will allow workers to liberate themselves .
moreover , anarcho-syndicalists believe that workers ' organisations ( the organisations that struggle against the wage system , which , in anarcho-syndicalist theory , will eventually form the basis of a new society ) should be self-managing .
they should not have bosses or " business agents "; rather , the workers should be able to make all the decisions that affect them themselves .
rudolf rocker was one of the most popular voices in the anarcho-syndicalist movement .
he outlined a view of the origins of the movement , what it sought , and why it was important to the future of labour in his 1000 pamphlet " anarcho-syndicalism ".
the international workers association is an international anarcho-syndicalist federation of various labour unions from different countries .
the spanish confederacin nacional del trabajo played and still plays a major role in the spanish labour movement .
it was also an important force in the spanish civil war .
anarchism continues to generate many philosophies and movements , at times eclectic , drawing upon various sources , and syncretic , combining disparate concepts to create new philosophical approaches .
green anarchism ( or eco-anarchism ) is a school of thought within anarchism that emphasises environmental issues , with an important precedent in anarcho-naturism , and whose main contemporary currents are anarcho-primitivism and social ecology .
writing from a green anarchist perspective , john zerzan attributes the ills of today 's social degradation to technology and the birth of agricultural civilization .
while layla abdelrahim argues that " the shift in human consciousness was also a shift in human subsistence strategies , whereby some human animals reinvented their narrative to center murder and predation and thereby institutionalize violence ".
thus , according to her , civilization was the result of the human development of technologies and grammar for predatory economics .
language and literacy , she claims , are some of these technologies .
anarcha-feminism ( also called anarchist feminism and anarcho-feminism ) combines anarchism with feminism .
it generally views patriarchy as a manifestation of involuntary coercive hierarchy that should be replaced by decentralised free association .
anarcha-feminists believe that the struggle against patriarchy is an essential part of class struggle , and the anarchist struggle against the state .
in essence , the philosophy sees anarchist struggle as a necessary component of feminist struggle and vice versa .
l . susan brown claims that " as anarchism is a political philosophy that opposes all relationships of power , it is inherently feminist ".
anarcha-feminism began with the late 10th-century writings of early feminist anarchists such as emma goldman and voltairine de cleyre .
anarcho-pacifism is a tendency that rejects violence in the struggle for social change ( see non-violence ).
it developed " mostly in the netherlands , britain , and the united states , before and during the second world war ".
christian anarchism is a movement in political theology that combines anarchism and christianity .
its main proponents included leo tolstoy , dorothy day , ammon hennacy , and jacques ellul .
platformism is a tendency within the wider anarchist movement based on the organisational theories in the tradition of dielo truda 's " organisational platform of the general union of anarchists ( draft )".
the document was based on the experiences of russian anarchists in the 1000 october revolution , which led eventually to the victory of the bolsheviks over the anarchists and other groups .
the " platform " attempted to address and explain the anarchist movement 's failures during the russian revolution .
synthesis anarchism is a form of anarchism that tries to join anarchists of different tendencies under the principles of anarchism without adjectives .
in the 1000s , this form found as its main proponents the anarcho-communists voline and sbastien faure .
it is the main principle behind the anarchist federations grouped around the contemporary global international of anarchist federations .
post-left anarchy is a recent current in anarchist thought that promotes a critique of anarchism 's relationship to traditional left-wing politics .
some post-leftists seek to escape the confines of ideology in general also presenting a critique of organisations and morality .
influenced by the work of max stirner and by the marxist situationist international , post-left anarchy is marked by a focus on social insurrection and a rejection of leftist social organisation .
insurrectionary anarchism is a revolutionary theory , practice , and tendency within the anarchist movement which emphasises insurrection within anarchist practice .
it is critical of formal organisations such as labour unions and federations that are based on a political programme and periodic congresses .
instead , insurrectionary anarchists advocate informal organisation and small affinity group based organisation .
insurrectionary anarchists put value in attack , permanent class conflict , and a refusal to negotiate or compromise with class enemies .
post-anarchism is a theoretical move towards a synthesis of classical anarchist theory and poststructuralist thought , drawing from diverse ideas including post-modernism , autonomist marxism , post-left anarchy , situationist international , and postcolonialism .
left-wing market anarchism strongly affirm the classical liberal ideas of self-ownership and free markets , while maintaining that , taken to their logical conclusions , these ideas support strongly anti-corporatist , anti-hierarchical , pro-labour positions and anti-capitalism in economics and anti-imperialism in foreign policy .
anarcho-capitalism advocates the elimination of the state in favour of self-ownership in a free market .
anarcho-capitalism developed from radical anti-state libertarianism and individualist anarchism , drawing from austrian school economics , study of law and economics , and public choice theory .
there is a strong current within anarchism which believes that anarcho-capitalism cannot be considered a part of the anarchist movement , due to the fact that anarchism has historically been an anti-capitalist movement and for definitional reasons which see anarchism as incompatible with capitalist forms .
anarchism is a philosophy that embodies many diverse attitudes , tendencies and schools of thought ; as such , disagreement over questions of values , ideology and tactics is common .
the compatibility of capitalism , nationalism , and religion with anarchism is widely disputed .
similarly , anarchism enjoys complex relationships with ideologies such as marxism , communism , collectivism , syndicalism/trade unionism , and capitalism .
anarchists may be motivated by humanism , divine authority , enlightened self-interest , veganism or any number of alternative ethical doctrines .
phenomena such as civilisation , technology ( e . g .
within anarcho-primitivism ), and the democratic process may be sharply criticised within some anarchist tendencies and simultaneously lauded in others .
on a tactical level , while propaganda of the deed was a tactic used by anarchists in the 10th century ( e . g .
the nihilist movement ), some contemporary anarchists espouse alternative direct action methods such as nonviolence , counter-economics and anti-state cryptography to bring about an anarchist society .
about the scope of an anarchist society , some anarchists advocate a global one , while others do so by local ones .
the diversity in anarchism has led to widely different use of identical terms among different anarchist traditions , which has led to many definitional concerns in anarchist theory .
intersecting and overlapping between various schools of thought , certain topics of interest and internal disputes have proven perennial within anarchist theory .
an important current within anarchism is free love .
free love advocates sometimes traced their roots back to josiah warren and to experimental communities , viewed sexual freedom as a clear , direct expression of an individual 's sovereignty .
free love particularly stressed women 's rights since most sexual laws discriminated against women : for example , marriage laws and anti-birth control measures .
the most important american free love journal was " lucifer the lightbearer " ( 10000000 ) edited by moses harman and lois waisbrooker , but also there existed ezra heywood and angela heywood 's " the word " ( 10000000 , 10000000 ).
" free society " ( 10000000 as " the firebrand "; 10000000 as " free society ") was a major anarchist newspaper in the united states at the end of the 10th and beginning of the 20th centuries .
the publication advocated free love and women 's rights , and critiqued " comstockery " censorship of sexual information .
also m . e . lazarus was an important american individualist anarchist who promoted free love .
in new york city 's greenwich village , bohemian feminists and socialists advocated self-realisation and pleasure for women ( and also men ) in the here and now .
they encouraged playing with sexual roles and sexuality , and the openly bisexual radical edna st . vincent millay and the lesbian anarchist margaret anderson were prominent among them .
discussion groups organised by the villagers were frequented by emma goldman , among others .
magnus hirschfeld noted in 1000 that goldman " has campaigned boldly and steadfastly for individual rights , and especially for those deprived of their rights .
thus it came about that she was the first and only woman , indeed the first and only american , to take up the defence of homosexual love before the general public ."
in fact , before goldman , heterosexual anarchist robert reitzel ( 10000000 ) spoke positively of homosexuality from the beginning of the 1000s in his detroit-based german language journal " der arme teufel " ( english : the poor devil ).
in argentina anarcha-feminist virginia bolten published the newspaper called "" ( english : the woman 's voice ), which was published nine times in rosario between 8 january 1000 and 1 january 1000 , and was revived , briefly , in 1000 .
in europe the main propagandist of free love within individualist anarchism was emile armand .
he proposed the concept of " la camaraderie amoureuse " to speak of free love as the possibility of voluntary sexual encounter between consenting adults .
he was also a consistent proponent of polyamory .
in germany the stirnerists adolf brand and john henry mackay were pioneering campaigners for the acceptance of male bisexuality and homosexuality .
mujeres libres was an anarchist women 's organisation in spain that aimed to empower working class women .
it was founded in 1000 by luca snchez saornil , mercedes comaposada and amparo poch y gascn and had approximately 30 , 000 members .
the organisation was based on the idea of a " double struggle " for women 's liberation and social revolution and argued that the two objectives were equally important and should be pursued in parallel .
in order to gain mutual support , they created networks of women anarchists .
luca snchez saornil was a main founder of the spanish anarcha-feminist federation mujeres libres who was open about her lesbianism .
she was published in a variety of literary journals where working under a male pen name , she was able to explore lesbian themes at a time when homosexuality was criminalised and subject to censorship and punishment .
more recently , the british anarcho-pacifist alex comfort gained notoriety during the sexual revolution for writing the bestseller sex manual " the joy of sex ".
the issue of free love has a dedicated treatment in the work of french anarcho-hedonist philosopher michel onfray in such works as " thorie du corps amoureux : pour une rotique solaire " ( 2000 ) and " l ' invention du plaisir : fragments cyraniques " ( 2000 ).
for english anarchist william godwin education was " the main means by which change would be achieved ."
godwin saw that the main goal of education should be the promotion of happiness .
for godwin education had to have " a respect for the child 's autonomy which precluded any form of coercion ," " a pedagogy that respected this and sought to build on the child 's own motivation and initiatives ," and " a concern about the child 's capacity to resist an ideology transmitted through the school ."
in his " political justice " he criticises state sponsored schooling " on account of its obvious alliance with national government ".
early american anarchist josiah warren advanced alternative education experiences in the libertarian communities he established .
max stirner wrote in 1000 a long essay on education called " the false principle of our education ".
in it stirner names his educational principle " personalist ," explaining that self-understanding consists in hourly self-creation .
education for him is to create " free men , sovereign characters ," by which he means " eternal characters ... who are therefore eternal because they form themselves each moment ".
in the united states " freethought was a basically anti-christian , anti-clerical movement , whose purpose was to make the individual politically and spiritually free to decide for himself on religious matters .
a number of contributors to " liberty " ( anarchist publication ) were prominent figures in both freethought and anarchism .
the individualist anarchist george macdonald was a co-editor of " freethought " and , for a time , " the truth seeker ".
e . c .
walker was co-editor of the excellent free-thought / free love journal " lucifer , the light-bearer "".
" many of the anarchists were ardent freethinkers ; reprints from freethought papers such as " lucifer , the light-bearer ", " freethought " and " the truth seeker " appeared in " liberty "... the church was viewed as a common ally of the state and as a repressive force in and of itself ".
in 1000 , catalan anarchist and free-thinker francesc ferrer i gurdia established " modern " or progressive schools in barcelona in defiance of an educational system controlled by the catholic church .
the schools ' stated goal was to " educate the working class in a rational , secular and non-coercive setting ".
fiercely anti-clerical , ferrer believed in " freedom in education ", education free from the authority of church and state .
murray bookchin wrote : " this period [ 1000s ] was the heyday of libertarian schools and pedagogical projects in all areas of the country where anarchists exercised some degree of influence .
perhaps the best-known effort in this field was francisco ferrer 's modern school ( escuela moderna ), a project which exercised a considerable influence on catalan education and on experimental techniques of teaching generally ."
la escuela moderna , and ferrer 's ideas generally , formed the inspiration for a series of " modern schools " in the united states , cuba , south america and london .
the first of these was started in new york city in 1000 .
it also inspired the italian newspaper " universit popolare ", founded in 1000 .
russian christian anarchist leo tolstoy established a school for peasant children on his estate .
tolstoy 's educational experiments were short-lived due to harassment by the tsarist secret police .
tolstoy established a conceptual difference between education and culture .
he thought that " education is the tendency of one man to make another just like himself ... education is culture under restraint , culture is free .
[ education is ] when the teaching is forced upon the pupil , and when then instruction is exclusive , that is when only those subjects are taught which the educator regards as necessary ".
for him " without compulsion , education was transformed into culture ".
a more recent libertarian tradition on education is that of unschooling and the free school in which child-led activity replaces pedagogic approaches .
experiments in germany led to a . s . neill founding what became summerhill school in 1000 .
summerhill is often cited as an example of anarchism in practice .
however , although summerhill and other free schools are radically libertarian , they differ in principle from those of ferrer by not advocating an overtly political class struggle-approach .
in addition to organising schools according to libertarian principles , anarchists have also questioned the concept of schooling per se .
the term deschooling was popularised by ivan illich , who argued that the school as an institution is dysfunctional for self-determined learning and serves the creation of a consumer society instead .
criticisms of anarchism include moral criticisms and pragmatic criticisms .
anarchism is often evaluated as unfeasible or utopian by its critics .
autism
autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impaired social interaction , impaired verbal and non-verbal communication , and restricted and repetitive behavior .
parents usually notice signs in the first two years of their child 's life .
these signs often develop gradually , though some children with autism reach their developmental milestones at a normal pace and then regress .
the diagnostic criteria require that symptoms become apparent in early childhood , typically before age three .
autism is caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors .
some cases are strongly associated with certain infections during pregnancy including rubella and use of alcohol or cocaine .
controversies surround other proposed environmental causes ; for example the vaccine hypotheses , which have been disproven .
autism affects information processing in the brain by altering how nerve cells and their synapses connect and organize ; how this occurs is not well understood .
in the dsm v , autism is included within the autism spectrum ( asds ), as is asperger syndrome , which lacks delays in cognitive development and language , and pervasive developmental disorder , not otherwise specified ( commonly abbreviated as pdd-nos ), which was diagnosed when the full set of criteria for autism or asperger syndrome were not met .
early speech or behavioral interventions can help children with autism gain self-care , social , and communication skills .
although there is no known cure , there have been reported cases of children who recovered .
not many children with autism live independently after reaching adulthood , though some become successful .
an autistic culture has developed , with some individuals seeking a cure and others believing autism should be accepted as a difference and not treated as a disorder .
globally , autism is estimated to affect 20 . 8 million people as of 2000 .
as of 2000 , the number of people affected is estimated at about 10 per 1 , 000 worldwide .
it occurs four to five times more often in boys than girls .
about 1 . 5 % of children in the united states ( one in 60 ) are diagnosed with asd , a 30 % increase from one in 80 in 2000 .
the rate of autism among adults aged 10 years and over in the united kingdom is 1 . 1 %.
the number of people diagnosed has been increasing dramatically since the 1000s , partly due to changes in diagnostic practice ; the question of whether actual rates have increased is unresolved .
autism is a highly variable neurodevelopmental disorder that first appears during infancy or childhood , and generally follows a steady course without remission .
people with autism may be severely impaired in some respects but normal , or even superior , in others .
overt symptoms gradually begin after the age of six months , become established by age two or three years , and tend to continue through adulthood , although often in more muted form .
it is distinguished not by a single symptom , but by a characteristic triad of symptoms : impairments in social interaction ; impairments in communication ; and restricted interests and repetitive behavior .
other aspects , such as atypical eating , are also common but are not essential for diagnosis .
autism 's individual symptoms occur in the general population and appear not to associate highly , without a sharp line separating pathologically severe from common traits .
social deficits distinguish autism and the related autism spectrum disorders ( asd ; see classification ) from other developmental disorders .
people with autism have social impairments and often lack the intuition about others that many people take for granted .
noted autistic temple grandin described her inability to understand the social communication of neurotypicals , or people with normal neural development , as leaving her feeling " like an anthropologist on mars ".
unusual social development becomes apparent early in childhood .
autistic infants show less attention to social stimuli , smile and look at others less often , and respond less to their own name .
autistic toddlers differ more strikingly from social norms ; for example , they have less eye contact and turn-taking , and do not have the ability to use simple movements to express themselves , such as pointing at things .
three - to five-year-old children with autism are less likely to exhibit social understanding , approach others spontaneously , imitate and respond to emotions , communicate nonverbally , and take turns with others .
however , they do form attachments to their primary caregivers .
most children with autism display moderately less attachment security than neurotypical children , although this difference disappears in children with higher mental development or less severe asd .
older children and adults with asd perform worse on tests of face and emotion recognition although this may be partly due to a lower ability to define a person 's own emotions .
children with high-functioning autism suffer from more intense and frequent loneliness compared to non-autistic peers , despite the common belief that children with autism prefer to be alone .
making and maintaining friendships often proves to be difficult for those with autism .
for them , the quality of friendships , not the number of friends , predicts how lonely they feel .
functional friendships , such as those resulting in invitations to parties , may affect the quality of life more deeply .
there are many anecdotal reports , but few systematic studies , of aggression and violence in individuals with asd .
the limited data suggest that , in children with intellectual disability , autism is associated with aggression , destruction of property , and tantrums .
about a third to a half of individuals with autism do not develop enough natural speech to meet their daily communication needs .
differences in communication may be present from the first year of life , and may include delayed onset of babbling , unusual gestures , diminished responsiveness , and vocal patterns that are not synchronized with the caregiver .
in the second and third years , children with autism have less frequent and less diverse babbling , consonants , words , and word combinations ; their gestures are less often integrated with words .
children with autism are less likely to make requests or share experiences , and are more likely to simply repeat others ' words ( echolalia ) or reverse pronouns .
joint attention seems to be necessary for functional speech , and deficits in joint attention seem to distinguish infants with asd : for example , they may look at a pointing hand instead of the pointed-at object , and they consistently fail to point at objects in order to comment on or share an experience .
children with autism may have difficulty with imaginative play and with developing symbols into language .
in a pair of studies , high-functioning children with autism aged 800 performed equally well as , and adults better than , individually matched controls at basic language tasks involving vocabulary and spelling .
both autistic groups performed worse than controls at complex language tasks such as figurative language , comprehension and inference .
as people are often sized up initially from their basic language skills , these studies suggest that people speaking to autistic individuals are more likely to overestimate what their audience comprehends .
autistic individuals can display many forms of repetitive or restricted behavior , which the repetitive behavior scale-revised ( rbs-r ) categorizes as follows .
no single repetitive or self-injurious behavior seems to be specific to autism , but autism appears to have an elevated pattern of occurrence and severity of these behaviors .
autistic individuals may have symptoms that are independent of the diagnosis , but that can affect the individual or the family .
an estimated 0 . 5 % to 10 % of individuals with asd show unusual abilities , ranging from splinter skills such as the memorization of trivia to the extraordinarily rare talents of prodigious autistic savants .
many individuals with asd show superior skills in perception and attention , relative to the general population .
sensory abnormalities are found in over 90 % of those with autism , and are considered core features by some , although there is no good evidence that sensory symptoms differentiate autism from other developmental disorders .
differences are greater for under-responsivity ( for example , walking into things ) than for over-responsivity ( for example , distress from loud noises ) or for sensation seeking ( for example , rhythmic movements ).
an estimated 60 % 80 % of autistic people have motor signs that include poor muscle tone , poor motor planning , and toe walking ; deficits in motor coordination are pervasive across asd and are greater in autism proper .
unusual eating behavior occurs in about three-quarters of children with asd , to the extent that it was formerly a diagnostic indicator .
selectivity is the most common problem , although eating rituals and food refusal also occur ; this does not appear to result in malnutrition .
although some children with autism also have gastrointestinal symptoms , there is a lack of published rigorous data to support the theory that children with autism have more or different gastrointestinal symptoms than usual ; studies report conflicting results , and the relationship between gastrointestinal problems and asd is unclear .
parents of children with asd have higher levels of stress .
siblings of children with asd report greater admiration of and less conflict with the affected sibling than siblings of unaffected children and were similar to siblings of children with down syndrome in these aspects of the sibling relationship .
however , they reported lower levels of closeness and intimacy than siblings of children with down syndrome ; siblings of individuals with asd have greater risk of negative well-being and poorer sibling relationships as adults .
it has long been presumed that there is a common cause at the genetic , cognitive , and neural levels for autism 's characteristic triad of symptoms .
however , there is increasing suspicion that autism is instead a complex disorder whose core aspects have distinct causes that often co-occur .
autism has a strong genetic basis , although the genetics of autism are complex and it is unclear whether asd is explained more by rare mutations with major effects , or by rare multigene interactions of common genetic variants .
complexity arises due to interactions among multiple genes , the environment , and epigenetic factors which do not change dna sequencing but are heritable and influence gene expression .
many genes have been associated with autism through sequencing the genomes of affected individuals and their parents .
studies of twins suggest that heritability is 0 . 7 for autism and as high as 0 . 9 for asd , and siblings of those with autism are about 20 times more likely to be autistic than the general population .
however , most of the mutations that increase autism risk have not been identified .
typically , autism cannot be traced to a mendelian ( single-gene ) mutation or to a single chromosome abnormality , and none of the genetic syndromes associated with asds have been shown to selectively cause asd .
numerous candidate genes have been located , with only small effects attributable to any particular gene .
most loci individually explain less than 1 % of cases of autism .
the large number of autistic individuals with unaffected family members may result from spontaneous structural variation such as deletions , duplications or inversions in genetic material during meiosis .
hence , a substantial fraction of autism cases may be traceable to genetic causes that are highly heritable but not inherited : that is , the mutation that causes the autism is not present in the parental genome .
several lines of evidence point to synaptic dysfunction as a cause of autism .
some rare mutations may lead to autism by disrupting some synaptic pathways , such as those involved with cell adhesion .
gene replacement studies in mice suggest that autistic symptoms are closely related to later developmental steps that depend on activity in synapses and on activity-dependent changes .
all known teratogens ( agents that cause birth defects ) related to the risk of autism appear to act during the first eight weeks from conception , and though this does not exclude the possibility that autism can be initiated or affected later , there is strong evidence that autism arises very early in development .
exposure to air pollution during pregnancy , especially heavy metals and particulates , may increase the risk of autism .
environmental factors that have been claimed without evidence to contribute to or exacerbate autism include certain foods , infectious diseases , solvents , diesel exhaust , pcbs , phthalates and phenols used in plastic products , pesticides , brominated flame retardants , alcohol , smoking , illicit drugs , vaccines , and prenatal stress .
no evidence has been found for these claims , and some such as the mmr vaccine have been completely disproven .
parents may first become aware of autistic symptoms in their child around the time of a routine vaccination .
this has led to unsupported theories blaming vaccine " overload ", a vaccine preservative , or the mmr vaccine for causing autism .
the latter theory was supported by a litigation-funded study that has since been shown to have been " an elaborate fraud ".
although these theories lack convincing scientific evidence and are biologically implausible , parental concern about a potential vaccine link with autism has led to lower rates of childhood immunizations , outbreaks of previously controlled childhood diseases in some countries , and the preventable deaths of several children .
autism 's symptoms result from maturation-related changes in various systems of the brain .
how autism occurs is not well understood .
its mechanism can be divided into two areas : the pathophysiology of brain structures and processes associated with autism , and the neuropsychological linkages between brain structures and behaviors .
the behaviors appear to have multiple pathophysiologies .
unlike many other brain disorders , such as parkinson 's , autism does not have a clear unifying mechanism at either the molecular , cellular , or systems level ; it is not known whether autism is a few disorders caused by mutations converging on a few common molecular pathways , or is ( like intellectual disability ) a large set of disorders with diverse mechanisms .
autism appears to result from developmental factors that affect many or all functional brain systems , and to disturb the timing of brain development more than the final product .
neuroanatomical studies and the associations with teratogens strongly suggest that autism 's mechanism includes alteration of brain development soon after conception .
this anomaly appears to start a cascade of pathological events in the brain that are significantly influenced by environmental factors .
just after birth , the brains of children with autism tend to grow faster than usual , followed by normal or relatively slower growth in childhood .
it is not known whether early overgrowth occurs in all children with autism .
it seems to be most prominent in brain areas underlying the development of higher cognitive specialization .
hypotheses for the cellular and molecular bases of pathological early overgrowth include the following :
the immune system is thought to play an important role in autism .
children with autism have been found by researchers to have inflammation of both the peripheral and central immune systems as indicated by increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and significant activation of microglia .
biomarkers of abnormal immune function have also been associated with increased impairments in behaviors that are characteristic of the core features of autism such as deficits in social interactions and communication .
interactions between the immune system and the nervous system begin early during the embryonic stage of life , and successful neurodevelopment depends on a balanced immune response .
it is thought that activation of a pregnant mother 's immune system such as from environmental toxicants or infection can contribute to causing autism through causing a disruption of brain development .
this is supported by recent studies that have found that infection during pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of autism .
the relationship of neurochemicals to autism is not well understood ; several have been investigated , with the most evidence for the role of serotonin and of genetic differences in its transport .
the role of group i metabotropic glutamate receptors ( mglur ) in the pathogenesis of fragile x syndrome , the most common identified genetic cause of autism , has led to interest in the possible implications for future autism research into this pathway .
some data suggests neuronal overgrowth potentially related to an increase in several growth hormones or to impaired regulation of growth factor receptors .
also , some inborn errors of metabolism are associated with autism , but probably account for less than 5 % of cases .
the mirror neuron system ( mns ) theory of autism hypothesizes that distortion in the development of the mns interferes with imitation and leads to autism 's core features of social impairment and communication difficulties .
the mns operates when an animal performs an action or observes another animal perform the same action .
the mns may contribute to an individual 's understanding of other people by enabling the modeling of their behavior via embodied simulation of their actions , intentions , and emotions .
several studies have tested this hypothesis by demonstrating structural abnormalities in mns regions of individuals with asd , delay in the activation in the core circuit for imitation in individuals with asperger syndrome , and a correlation between reduced mns activity and severity of the syndrome in children with asd .
however , individuals with autism also have abnormal brain activation in many circuits outside the mns and the mns theory does not explain the normal performance of children with autism on imitation tasks that involve a goal or object .
asd-related patterns of low function and aberrant activation in the brain differ depending on whether the brain is doing social or nonsocial tasks .
in autism there is evidence for reduced functional connectivity of the default network , a large-scale brain network involved in social and emotional processing , with intact connectivity of the task-positive network , used in sustained attention and goal-directed thinking .
in people with autism the two networks are not negatively correlated in time , suggesting an imbalance in toggling between the two networks , possibly reflecting a disturbance of self-referential thought .
the underconnectivity theory of autism hypothesizes that autism is marked by underfunctioning high-level neural connections and synchronization , along with an excess of low-level processes .
evidence for this theory has been found in functional neuroimaging studies on autistic individuals and by a brainwave study that suggested that adults with asd have local overconnectivity in the cortex and weak functional connections between the frontal lobe and the rest of the cortex .
other evidence suggests the underconnectivity is mainly within each hemisphere of the cortex and that autism is a disorder of the association cortex .
from studies based on event-related potentials , transient changes to the brain 's electrical activity in response to stimuli , there is considerable evidence for differences in autistic individuals with respect to attention , orientation to auditory and visual stimuli , novelty detection , language and face processing , and information storage ; several studies have found a preference for nonsocial stimuli .
for example , magnetoencephalography studies have found evidence in children with autism of delayed responses in the brain 's processing of auditory signals .
in the genetic area , relations have been found between autism and schizophrenia based on duplications and deletions of chromosomes ; research showed that schizophrenia and autism are significantly more common in combination with 1q20 . 1 deletion syndrome .
research on autism/schizophrenia relations for chromosome 10 ( 10q10 . 3 ), chromosome 10 ( 10p10 . 1 ) and chromosome 10 ( 10p10 ) are inconclusive .
functional connectivity studies have found both hypo - and hyper-connectivity in brains of people with autism .
hypo-connectivity seems to dominate , especially for interhemispheric and cortico-cortical functional connectivity .
two major categories of cognitive theories have been proposed about the links between autistic brains and behavior .
the first category focuses on deficits in social cognition .
simon baron-cohen 's empathizingsystemizing theory postulates that autistic individuals can systemizethat is , they can develop internal rules of operation to handle events inside the brainbut are less effective at empathizing by handling events generated by other agents .
an extension , the extreme male brain theory , hypothesizes that autism is an extreme case of the male brain , defined psychometrically as individuals in whom systemizing is better than empathizing .
these theories are somewhat related to baron-cohen 's earlier theory of mind approach , which hypothesizes that autistic behavior arises from an inability to ascribe mental states to oneself and others .
the theory of mind hypothesis is supported by the atypical responses of children with autism to the sallyanne test for reasoning about others ' motivations , and the mirror neuron system theory of autism described in " pathophysiology " maps well to the hypothesis .
however , most studies have found no evidence of impairment in autistic individuals ' ability to understand other people 's basic intentions or goals ; instead , data suggests that impairments are found in understanding more complex social emotions or in considering others ' viewpoints .
the second category focuses on nonsocial or general processing : the executive functions such as working memory , planning , inhibition .
in his review , kenworthy states that " the claim of executive dysfunction as a causal factor in autism is controversial ", however , " it is clear that executive dysfunction plays a role in the social and cognitive deficits observed in individuals with autism ".
tests of core executive processes such as eye movement tasks indicate improvement from late childhood to adolescence , but performance never reaches typical adult levels .
a strength of the theory is predicting stereotyped behavior and narrow interests ; two weaknesses are that executive function is hard to measure and that executive function deficits have not been found in young children with autism .
weak central coherence theory hypothesizes that a limited ability to see the big picture underlies the central disturbance in autism .
one strength of this theory is predicting special talents and peaks in performance in autistic people .
a related theoryenhanced perceptual functioningfocuses more on the superiority of locally oriented and perceptual operations in autistic individuals .
these theories map well from the underconnectivity theory of autism .
neither category is satisfactory on its own ; social cognition theories poorly address autism 's rigid and repetitive behaviors , while the nonsocial theories have difficulty explaining social impairment and communication difficulties .
a combined theory based on multiple deficits may prove to be more useful .
diagnosis is based on behavior , not cause or mechanism .
under the dsm-5 , autism is characterized by persistent deficits in social communication and interaction across multiple contexts , as well as restricted , repetitive patterns of behavior , interests , or activities .
these deficits are present in early childhood , typically before age three , and lead to clinically significant functional impairment .
sample symptoms include lack of social or emotional reciprocity , stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic language , and persistent preoccupation with unusual objects .
the disturbance must not be better accounted for by rett syndrome , intellectual disability or global developmental delay .
icd-10 uses essentially the same definition .
several diagnostic instruments are available .
two are commonly used in autism research : the autism diagnostic interview-revised ( adi-r ) is a semistructured parent interview , and the autism diagnostic observation schedule ( ados ) uses observation and interaction with the child .
the childhood autism rating scale ( cars ) is used widely in clinical environments to assess severity of autism based on observation of children .
the diagnostic interview for social and communication disorders ( disco ) may also be used .
a pediatrician commonly performs a preliminary investigation by taking developmental history and physically examining the child .
if warranted , diagnosis and evaluations are conducted with help from asd specialists , observing and assessing cognitive , communication , family , and other factors using standardized tools , and taking into account any associated medical conditions .
a pediatric neuropsychologist is often asked to assess behavior and cognitive skills , both to aid diagnosis and to help recommend educational interventions .
a differential diagnosis for asd at this stage might also consider intellectual disability , hearing impairment , and a specific language impairment such as landaukleffner syndrome .
the presence of autism can make it harder to diagnose coexisting psychiatric disorders such as depression .
clinical genetics evaluations are often done once asd is diagnosed , particularly when other symptoms already suggest a genetic cause .
although genetic technology allows clinical geneticists to link an estimated 40 % of cases to genetic causes , consensus guidelines in the us and uk are limited to high-resolution chromosome and fragile x testing .
a genotype-first model of diagnosis has been proposed , which would routinely assess the genome 's copy number variations .
as new genetic tests are developed several ethical , legal , and social issues will emerge .
commercial availability of tests may precede adequate understanding of how to use test results , given the complexity of autism 's genetics .
metabolic and neuroimaging tests are sometimes helpful , but are not routine .
asd can sometimes be diagnosed by age 10 months , although diagnosis becomes increasingly stable over the first three years of life : for example , a one-year-old who meets diagnostic criteria for asd is less likely than a three-year-old to continue to do so a few years later .
in the uk the national autism plan for children recommends at most 30 weeks from first concern to completed diagnosis and assessment , though few cases are handled that quickly in practice .
although the symptoms of autism and asd begin early in childhood , they are sometimes missed ; years later , adults may seek diagnoses to help them or their friends and family understand themselves , to help their employers make adjustments , or in some locations to claim disability living allowances or other benefits .
underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis are problems in marginal cases , and much of the recent increase in the number of reported asd cases is likely due to changes in diagnostic practices .
the increasing popularity of drug treatment options and the expansion of benefits has given providers incentives to diagnose asd , resulting in some overdiagnosis of children with uncertain symptoms .
conversely , the cost of screening and diagnosis and the challenge of obtaining payment can inhibit or delay diagnosis .
it is particularly hard to diagnose autism among the visually impaired , partly because some of its diagnostic criteria depend on vision , and partly because autistic symptoms overlap with those of common blindness syndromes or blindisms .
autism is one of the five pervasive developmental disorders ( pdd ), which are characterized by widespread abnormalities of social interactions and communication , and severely restricted interests and highly repetitive behavior .
these symptoms do not imply sickness , fragility , or emotional disturbance .
of the five pdd forms , asperger syndrome is closest to autism in signs and likely causes ; rett syndrome and childhood disintegrative disorder share several signs with autism , but may have unrelated causes ; pdd not otherwise specified ( pdd-nos ; also called " atypical autism ") is diagnosed when the criteria are not met for a more specific disorder .
unlike with autism , people with asperger syndrome have no substantial delay in language development .
the terminology of autism can be bewildering , with autism , asperger syndrome and pdd-nos often called the " autism spectrum disorders " ( asd ) or sometimes the " autistic disorders ", whereas autism itself is often called " autistic disorder ", " childhood autism ", or " infantile autism ".
in this article , " autism " refers to the classic autistic disorder ; in clinical practice , though , " autism ", " asd ", and " pdd " are often used interchangeably .
asd , in turn , is a subset of the broader autism phenotype , which describes individuals who may not have asd but do have autistic-like traits , such as avoiding eye contact .
the manifestations of autism cover a wide spectrum , ranging from individuals with severe impairmentswho may be silent , developmentally disabled , and locked into hand flapping and rockingto high functioning individuals who may have active but distinctly odd social approaches , narrowly focused interests , and verbose , pedantic communication .
because the behavior spectrum is continuous , boundaries between diagnostic categories are necessarily somewhat arbitrary .
sometimes the syndrome is divided into low -, medium - or high-functioning autism ( lfa , mfa , and hfa ), based on iq thresholds , or on how much support the individual requires in daily life ; these subdivisions are not standardized and are controversial .
autism can also be divided into syndromal and non-syndromal autism ; the syndromal autism is associated with severe or profound intellectual disability or a congenital syndrome with physical symptoms , such as tuberous sclerosis .
although individuals with asperger syndrome tend to perform better cognitively than those with autism , the extent of the overlap between asperger syndrome , hfa , and non-syndromal autism is unclear .
some studies have reported diagnoses of autism in children due to a loss of language or social skills , as opposed to a failure to make progress , typically from 10 to 30 months of age .
the validity of this distinction remains controversial ; it is possible that regressive autism is a specific subtype , or that there is a continuum of behaviors between autism with and without regression .
research into causes has been hampered by the inability to identify biologically meaningful subgroups within the autistic population and by the traditional boundaries between the disciplines of psychiatry , psychology , neurology and pediatrics .
newer technologies such as fmri and diffusion tensor imaging can help identify biologically relevant phenotypes ( observable traits ) that can be viewed on brain scans , to help further neurogenetic studies of autism ; one example is lowered activity in the fusiform face area of the brain , which is associated with impaired perception of people versus objects .
it has been proposed to classify autism using genetics as well as behavior .
about half of parents of children with asd notice their child 's unusual behaviors by age 10 months , and about four-fifths notice by age 20 months .
according to an article failure to meet any of the following milestones " is an absolute indication to proceed with further evaluations .
delay in referral for such testing may delay early diagnosis and treatment and affect the long-term outcome ".
the united states preventive services task force in 2000 found it was unclear if screening was beneficial or harmful among children in whom there is no concerns .
the japanese practice is to screen all children for asd at 10 and 20 months , using autism-specific formal screening tests .
in contrast , in the uk , children whose families or doctors recognize possible signs of autism are screened .
it is not known which approach is more effective .
screening tools include the modified checklist for autism in toddlers ( m-chat ), the early screening of autistic traits questionnaire , and the first year inventory ; initial data on m-chat and its predecessor , the checklist for autism in toddlers ( chat ), on children aged 1000 months suggests that it is best used in a clinical setting and that it has low sensitivity ( many false-negatives ) but good specificity ( few false-positives ).
it may be more accurate to precede these tests with a broadband screener that does not distinguish asd from other developmental disorders .
screening tools designed for one culture 's norms for behaviors like eye contact may be inappropriate for a different culture .
although genetic screening for autism is generally still impractical , it can be considered in some cases , such as children with neurological symptoms and dysmorphic features .
infection with rubella during pregnancy causes fewer than 1 % of cases of autism ; vaccination against rubella can prevent many of those cases .
the main goals when treating children with autism are to lessen associated deficits and family distress , and to increase quality of life and functional independence .
in general , higher iqs are correlated with greater responsiveness to treatment and improved treatment outcomes .
no single treatment is best and treatment is typically tailored to the child 's needs .
families and the educational system are the main resources for treatment .
studies of interventions have methodological problems that prevent definitive conclusions about efficacy , however the development of evidence-based interventions has advanced in recent years .
although many psychosocial interventions have some positive evidence , suggesting that some form of treatment is preferable to no treatment , the methodological quality of systematic reviews of these studies has generally been poor , their clinical results are mostly tentative , and there is little evidence for the relative effectiveness of treatment options .
intensive , sustained special education programs and behavior therapy early in life can help children acquire self-care , social , and job skills , and often improve functioning and decrease symptom severity and maladaptive behaviors ; claims that intervention by around age three years is crucial are not substantiated .
available approaches include applied behavior analysis ( aba ), developmental models , structured teaching , speech and language therapy , social skills therapy , and occupational therapy .
among these approaches , interventions either treat autistic features comprehensively , or focalize treatment on a specific area of deficit .
there is some evidence that early intensive behavioral intervention ( eibi ), an early intervention model based on aba for 20 to 40hours a week for multiple years , is an effective treatment for some children with asd .
two theoretical frameworks outlined for early childhood intervention include applied behavioral analysis ( aba ) and developmental social pragmatic models ( dsp ).
one interventional strategy utilizes a parent training model , which teaches parents how to implement various aba and dsp techniques , allowing for parents to disseminate interventions themselves .
various dsp programs have been developed to explicitly deliver intervention systems through at-home parent implementation .
despite the recent development of parent training models , these interventions have demonstrated effectiveness in numerous studies , being evaluated as a probable efficacious mode of treatment .
educational interventions can be effective to varying degrees in most children : intensive aba treatment has demonstrated effectiveness in enhancing global functioning in preschool children and is well-established for improving intellectual performance of young children .
similarly , teacher-implemented intervention that utilizes an aba combined with a developmental social pragmatic approach has been found to be a well-established treatment in improving social-communication skills in young children , although there is less evidence in its treatment of global symptoms .
neuropsychological reports are often poorly communicated to educators , resulting in a gap between what a report recommends and what education is provided .
it is not known whether treatment programs for children lead to significant improvements after the children grow up , and the limited research on the effectiveness of adult residential programs shows mixed results .
the appropriateness of including children with varying severity of autism spectrum disorders in the general education population is a subject of current debate among educators and researchers .
many medications are used to treat asd symptoms that interfere with integrating a child into home or school when behavioral treatment fails .
more than half of us children diagnosed with asd are prescribed psychoactive drugs or anticonvulsants , with the most common drug classes being antidepressants , stimulants , and antipsychotics .
antipsychotics , such as risperidone and aripiprazole , have been found to be useful for treating irritability , repetitive behavior , and sleeplessness that often occurs with autism , however their side effects must be weighed against their potential benefits , and people with autism may respond atypically .
there is scant reliable research about the effectiveness or safety of drug treatments for adolescents and adults with asd .
no known medication relieves autism 's core symptoms of social and communication impairments .
experiments in mice have reversed or reduced some symptoms related to autism by replacing or modulating gene function , suggesting the possibility of targeting therapies to specific rare mutations known to cause autism .
although many alternative therapies and interventions are available , few are supported by scientific studies .
treatment approaches have little empirical support in quality-of-life contexts , and many programs focus on success measures that lack predictive validity and real-world relevance .
scientific evidence appears to matter less to service providers than program marketing , training availability , and parent requests .
some alternative treatments may place the child at risk .
a 2000 study found that compared to their peers , autistic boys have significantly thinner bones if on casein-free diets ; in 2000 , botched chelation therapy killed a five-year-old child with autism .
there has been early research looking at hyperbaric treatments in children with autism .
although popularly used as an alternative treatment for people with autism , there is no good evidence that a gluten-free diet is of benefit .
in the subset of people who have gluten sensitivity there is limited evidence that suggests that a gluten free diet may improve some autistic behaviors .
treatment is expensive ; indirect costs are more so .
for someone born in 2000 , a us study estimated an average lifetime cost of $ ( net present value in dollars , inflation-adjusted from 2000 estimate ), with about 10 % medical care , 30 % extra education and other care , and 60 % lost economic productivity .
publicly supported programs are often inadequate or inappropriate for a given child , and unreimbursed out-of-pocket medical or therapy expenses are associated with likelihood of family financial problems ; one 2000 us study found a 10 % average loss of annual income in families of children with asd , and a related study found that asd is associated with higher probability that child care problems will greatly affect parental employment .
us states increasingly require private health insurance to cover autism services , shifting costs from publicly funded education programs to privately funded health insurance .
after childhood , key treatment issues include residential care , job training and placement , sexuality , social skills , and estate planning .
the emergence of the autism rights movement has served as an attempt to encourage people to be more tolerant of those with autism .
through this movement , people hope to cause others to think of autism as a difference instead of a disease .
proponents of this movement wish to seek " acceptance , not cures ."
there have also been many worldwide events promoting autism awareness such as world autism awareness day , light it up blue , autism sunday , autistic pride day , autreat , and others .
there have also been many organizations dedicated to increasing the awareness of autism and the effects that autism has on someone 's life .
these organizations include autism speaks , autism national committee , autism society of america , and many others .
social-science scholars have had an increased focused on studying those with autism in hopes to learn more about " autism as a culture , transcultural comparisons ... and research on social movements ."
media has had an influence on how the public perceives those with autism .
" rain man ", a film that won 4 oscars including best picture , depicts a character with autism who has incredible talents and abilities .
while many autistics don ' t have these special abilities , there are some autistic individuals who have been successful in their fields .
there is no known cure .
children recover occasionally , so that they lose their diagnosis of asd ; this occurs sometimes after intensive treatment and sometimes not .
it is not known how often recovery happens ; reported rates in unselected samples of children with asd have ranged from 3 % to 20 %.
most children with autism acquire language by age five or younger , though a few have developed communication skills in later years .
most children with autism lack social support , meaningful relationships , future employment opportunities or self-determination .
although core difficulties tend to persist , symptoms often become less severe with age .
few high-quality studies address long-term prognosis .
some adults show modest improvement in communication skills , but a few decline ; no study has focused on autism after midlife .
acquiring language before age six , having an iq above 50 , and having a marketable skill all predict better outcomes ; independent living is unlikely with severe autism .
most people with autism face significant obstacles in transitioning to adulthood .
most recent reviews tend to estimate a prevalence of 10 per 1 , 000 for autism and close to 6 per 1 , 000 for asd , and 10 per 1 , 000 children in the united states for asd as of 2000 ; because of inadequate data , these numbers may underestimate asd 's true rate .
globally , autism affects an estimated 20 . 8 million people as of 2000 , while asperger syndrome affects a further 30 . 2 million .
in 2000 , the nhs estimated that the overall prevalence of autism among adults aged 10 years and over in the uk was 1 . 1 %.
rates of pdd-nos 's has been estimated at 3 . 7 per 1 , 000 , asperger syndrome at roughly 0 . 6 per 1 , 000 , and childhood disintegrative disorder at 0 . 02 per 1 , 000 .
cdc 's most recent estimate is that 1 out of every 60 children , or 10 . 7 per 1 , 000 , has an asd as of 2000 .
the number of reported cases of autism increased dramatically in the 1000s and early 2000s .
this increase is largely attributable to changes in diagnostic practices , referral patterns , availability of services , age at diagnosis , and public awareness , though unidentified environmental risk factors cannot be ruled out .
the available evidence does not rule out the possibility that autism 's true prevalence has increased ; a real increase would suggest directing more attention and funding toward changing environmental factors instead of continuing to focus on genetics .
boys are at higher risk for asd than girls .
the sex ratio averages 4 . 3:1 and is greatly modified by cognitive impairment : it may be close to 2:1 with intellectual disability and more than 5 . 5:1 without .
several theories about the higher prevalence in males have been investigated , but the cause of the difference is unconfirmed ; one theory is that females are underdiagnosed .
although the evidence does not implicate any single pregnancy-related risk factor as a cause of autism , the risk of autism is associated with advanced age in either parent , and with diabetes , bleeding , and use of psychiatric drugs in the mother during pregnancy .
the risk is greater with older fathers than with older mothers ; two potential explanations are the known increase in mutation burden in older sperm , and the hypothesis that men marry later if they carry genetic liability and show some signs of autism .
most professionals believe that race , ethnicity , and socioeconomic background do not affect the occurrence of autism .
several other conditions are common in children with autism .
they include :
a few examples of autistic symptoms and treatments were described long before autism was named .
the " table talk " of martin luther , compiled by his notetaker , mathesius , contains the story of a 10-year-old boy who may have been severely autistic .
luther reportedly thought the boy was a soulless mass of flesh possessed by the devil , and suggested that he be suffocated , although a later critic has cast doubt on the veracity of this report .
the earliest well-documented case of autism is that of hugh blair of borgue , as detailed in a 1000 court case in which his brother successfully petitioned to annul blair 's marriage to gain blair 's inheritance .
the wild boy of aveyron , a feral child caught in 1000 , showed several signs of autism ; the medical student jean itard treated him with a behavioral program designed to help him form social attachments and to induce speech via imitation .
the new latin word " autismus " ( english translation " autism ") was coined by the swiss psychiatrist eugen bleuler in 1000 as he was defining symptoms of schizophrenia .
he derived it from the greek word " auts " (, meaning " self "), and used it to mean morbid self-admiration , referring to " autistic withdrawal of the patient to his fantasies , against which any influence from outside becomes an intolerable disturbance ".
the word " autism " first took its modern sense in 1000 when hans asperger of the vienna university hospital adopted bleuler 's terminology " autistic psychopaths " in a lecture in german about child psychology .
asperger was investigating an asd now known as asperger syndrome , though for various reasons it was not widely recognized as a separate diagnosis until 1000 .
leo kanner of the johns hopkins hospital first used " autism " in its modern sense in english when he introduced the label " early infantile autism " in a 1000 report of 10 children with striking behavioral similarities .
almost all the characteristics described in kanner 's first paper on the subject , notably " autistic aloneness " and " insistence on sameness ", are still regarded as typical of the autistic spectrum of disorders .
it is not known whether kanner derived the term independently of asperger .
donald triplett was the first person diagnosed with autism .
he was diagnosed by leo kanner after being first examined in 1000 , and was labeled as " case 1 ".
triplett was noted for his savant abilities , particularly being able to name musical notes played on a piano and to mentally multiply numbers .
his father , oliver , described him as socially withdrawn but interested in number patterns , music notes , letters of the alphabet , and u . s . president pictures .
by the age of 2 , he had the ability to recite the 20rd psalm and memorized 20 questions and answers from the presbyterian catechism .
he was also interested in creating musical chords .
kanner 's reuse of " autism " led to decades of confused terminology like " infantile schizophrenia ", and child psychiatry 's focus on maternal deprivation led to misconceptions of autism as an infant 's response to " refrigerator mothers ".
starting in the late 1000s autism was established as a separate syndrome .
as late as the mid-1000s there was little evidence of a genetic role in autism ; while in 2000 it was believed to be one of the most heritable psychiatric conditions .
although the rise of parent organizations and the destigmatization of childhood asd have affected how asd is viewed , parents continue to feel social stigma in situations where their child 's autistic behavior is perceived negatively , and many primary care physicians and medical specialists express some beliefs consistent with outdated autism research .
it took until 1000 for the dsm-iii to differentiate autism from childhood schizophrenia .
in 1000 , the dsm-iii-r provided a checklist for diagnosing autism .
in may 2000 , the dsm-5 was released , updating the classification for pervasive developmental disorders .
the grouping of disorders , including pdd-nos , autism , asperger syndrome , rett syndrome , and cdd , has been removed and replaced with the general term of autism spectrum disorders .
the two categories that exist are impaired social communication and/or interaction , and restricted and/or repetitive behaviors .
the internet has helped autistic individuals bypass nonverbal cues and emotional sharing that they find so hard to deal with , and has given them a way to form online communities and work remotely .
sociological and cultural aspects of autism have developed : some in the community seek a cure , while others believe that autism is simply another way of being .
albedo
albedo () is a measure for reflectance or optical brightness ( latin " albedo ," " whiteness ") of a surface .
it is dimensionless and measured on a scale from zero ( corresponding to a black body that absorbs all incident radiation ) to one ( corresponding to a white body that reflects all incident radiation ).
surface albedo is defined as the ratio of irradiance reflected to the irradiance received by a surface .
the proportion reflected is not only determined by properties of the surface itself , but also by the spectral and angular distribution of solar radiation reaching the earth 's surface .
these factors vary with atmospheric composition , geographic location and time ( see position of the sun ).
while bi-hemispherical reflectance is calculated for a single angle of incidence ( i . e ., for a given position of the sun ), albedo is the directional integration of reflectance over all solar angles in a given period .
the temporal resolution may range from seconds ( as obtained from flux measurements ) to daily , monthly or annual averages .
unless given for a specific wavelength ( spectral albedo ), albedo refers to the entire spectrum of solar radiation .
due to measurement constraints , it is often given for the spectrum in which most solar energy reaches the surface ( approximately between 0 . 3 and 3 m ).
this spectrum includes visible light ( 0 . 30-0 . 7 m ), which explains why surfaces with a low albedo appear dark ( e . g ., trees absorb most radiation ), whereas surfaces with a high albedo appear bright ( e . g ., snow reflects most radiation ).
albedo is an important concept in climatology , astronomy , and environmental management ( e . g ., as part of the leadership in energy and environmental design ( leed ) program for sustainable rating of buildings ).
the average albedo of the earth at the top of the atmosphere , its " planetary albedo ", is 30 to 30 % because of cloud cover , but widely varies locally across the surface because of different geological and environmental features .
the term albedo was introduced into optics by johann heinrich lambert in his 1000 work " photometria ".
any albedo in visible light falls within a range of about 0 . 9 for fresh snow to about 0 . 04 for charcoal , one of the darkest substances .
deeply shadowed cavities can achieve an effective albedo approaching the zero of a black body .
when seen from a distance , the ocean surface has a low albedo , as do most forests , whereas desert areas have some of the highest albedos among landforms .
most land areas are in an albedo range of 0 . 1 to 0 . 4 .
the average albedo of earth is about 0 . 3 .
this is far higher than for the ocean primarily because of the contribution of clouds .
earth 's surface albedo is regularly estimated via earth observation satellite sensors such as nasa 's modis instruments on board the terra and aqua satellites , and the ceres instrument on the suomi npp and jpss .
as the amount of reflected radiation is only measured for a single direction by satellite , not all directions , a mathematical model is used to translate a sample set of satellite reflectance measurements into estimates of directional-hemispherical reflectance and bi-hemispherical reflectance ( e . g .,).
these calculations are based on the bidirectional reflectance distribution function ( brdf ), which describes how the reflectance of a given surface depends on the view angle of the observer and the solar angle .
thereby , the brdf allows to translate observations of reflectance into albedo .
earth 's average surface temperature due to its albedo and the greenhouse effect is currently about 10c .
if earth were frozen entirely ( and hence be more reflective ), the average temperature of the planet would drop below 40c .
if only the continental land masses became covered by glaciers , the mean temperature of the planet would drop to about 0c .
in contrast , if the entire earth was covered by water a so-called aquaplanet the average temperature on the planet would rise to almost 20c .
for land surfaces , it has been shown that the albedo at a particular solar zenith angle "" can be approximated by the proportionate sum of two terms : the directional-hemispherical reflectance at that solar zenith angle , formula_1 , and the bi-hemispherical reflectance , formula_2 , with formula_3 being the proportion of direct radiation from a given solar angle , and formula_4 being the proportion of diffuse illumination .
hence , the actual albedo formula_5 ( also called blue-sky albedo ) can then be given as :
directional-hemispherical reflectance is sometimes referred to as black-sky albedo and bi-hemispherical reflectance as white-sky albedo .
these terms are important because they allow the albedo to be calculated for any given illumination conditions from a knowledge of the intrinsic properties of the surface .
the albedos of planets , satellites and minor planets such as asteroids can be used to infer much about their properties .
the study of albedos , their dependence on wavelength , lighting angle (" phase angle "), and variation in time comprises a major part of the astronomical field of photometry .
for small and far objects that cannot be resolved by telescopes , much of what we know comes from the study of their albedos .
for example , the absolute albedo can indicate the surface ice content of outer solar system objects , the variation of albedo with phase angle gives information about regolith properties , whereas unusually high radar albedo is indicative of high metal content in asteroids .
enceladus , a moon of saturn , has one of the highest known albedos of any body in the solar system , with 90 % of em radiation reflected .
another notable high-albedo body is eris , with an albedo of 0 . 90 .
many small objects in the outer solar system and asteroid belt have low albedos down to about 0 . 05 .
a typical comet nucleus has an albedo of 0 . 04 .
such a dark surface is thought to be indicative of a primitive and heavily space weathered surface containing some organic compounds .
the overall albedo of the moon is measured to be around 0 . 100 , but it is strongly directional and non-lambertian , displaying also a strong opposition effect .
although such reflectance properties are different from those of any terrestrial terrains , they are typical of the regolith surfaces of airless solar system bodies .
two common albedos that are used in astronomy are the ( v-band ) geometric albedo ( measuring brightness when illumination comes from directly behind the observer ) and the bond albedo ( measuring total proportion of electromagnetic energy reflected ).
their values can differ significantly , which is a common source of confusion .
in detailed studies , the directional reflectance properties of astronomical bodies are often expressed in terms of the five hapke parameters which semi-empirically describe the variation of albedo with phase angle , including a characterization of the opposition effect of regolith surfaces .
the correlation between astronomical ( geometric ) albedo , absolute magnitude and diameter is : formula_7 ,
where formula_8 is the astronomical albedo , formula_9 is the diameter in kilometers , and formula_10 is the absolute magnitude .
although the albedotemperature effect is best known in colder , whiter regions on earth , the maximum albedo is actually found in the tropics where year-round illumination is greater .
the maximum is additionally in the northern hemisphere , varying between three and twelve degrees north .
the minima are found in the subtropical regions of the northern and southern hemispheres , beyond which albedo increases without respect to illumination .
the intensity of albedo temperature effects depend on the amount of albedo and the level of local insolation ( solar irradiance ); high albedo areas in the arctic and antarctic regions are cold due to low insolation , where areas such as the sahara desert , which also have a relatively high albedo , will be hotter due to high insolation .
tropical and sub-tropical rainforest areas have low albedo , and are much hotter than their temperate forest counterparts , which have lower insolation .
because insolation plays such a big role in the heating and cooling effects of albedo , high insolation areas like the tropics will tend to show a more pronounced fluctuation in local temperature when local albedo changes .
arctic regions notably release more heat back into space than what they absorb , effectively cooling the earth .
this has been a concern since arctic ice and snow has been melting at higher rates due to higher temperatures , creating regions in the arctic that are notably darker ( being water or ground which is darker color ) and reflects less heat back into space .
this feedback loop results in a reduced albedo effect .
albedo affects climate by determining how much radiation a planet absorbs .
the uneven heating of earth from albedo variations between land , ice , or ocean surfaces can drive weather .
when an area 's albedo changes due to snowfall , a snowtemperature feedback results .
a layer of snowfall increases local albedo , reflecting away sunlight , leading to local cooling .
in principle , if no outside temperature change affects this area ( e . g ., a warm air mass ), the raised albedo and lower temperature would maintain the current snow and invite further snowfall , deepening the snowtemperature feedback .
however , because local weather is dynamic due to the change of seasons , eventually warm air masses and a more direct angle of sunlight ( higher insolation ) cause melting .
when the melted area reveals surfaces with lower albedo , such as grass or soil , the effect is reversed : the darkening surface lowers albedo , increasing local temperatures , which induces more melting and thus reducing the albedo further , resulting in still more heating .
snow albedo is highly variable , ranging from as high as 0 . 9 for freshly fallen snow , to about 0 . 4 for melting snow , and as low as 0 . 2 for dirty snow .
over antarctica they average a little more than 0 . 8 .
if a marginally snow-covered area warms , snow tends to melt , lowering the albedo , and hence leading to more snowmelt because more radiation is being absorbed by the snowpack ( the icealbedo positive feedback ).
cryoconite , powdery windblown dust containing soot , sometimes reduces albedo on glaciers and ice sheets .
hence , small errors in albedo can lead to large errors in energy estimates , which is why it is important to measure the albedo of snow-covered areas through remote sensing techniques rather than applying a single value over broad regions .
albedo works on a smaller scale , too .
in sunlight , dark clothes absorb more heat and light-coloured clothes reflect it better , thus allowing some control over body temperature by exploiting the albedo effect of the colour of external clothing .
albedo can affect the electrical energy output of solar photovoltaic devices .
for example , the effects of a spectrally responsive albedo are illustrated by the differences between the spectrally weighted albedo of solar photovoltaic technology based on hydrogenated amorphous silicon ( a-si:h ) and crystalline silicon ( c-si )- based compared to traditional spectral-integrated albedo predictions .
research showed impacts of over 10 %.
more recently , the analysis was extended to the effects of spectral bias due to the specular reflectivity of 20 commonly occurring surface materials ( both human-made and natural ) and analyzes the albedo effects on the performance of seven photovoltaic materials covering three common photovoltaic system topologies : industrial ( solar farms ), commercial flat rooftops and residential pitched-roof applications .
because forests generally have a low albedo , ( the majority of the ultraviolet and visible spectrum is absorbed through photosynthesis ), some scientists have suggested that greater heat absorption by trees could offset some of the carbon benefits of afforestation ( or offset the negative climate impacts of deforestation ).
in the case of evergreen forests with seasonal snow cover albedo reduction may be great enough for deforestation to cause a net cooling effect .
trees also impact climate in extremely complicated ways through evapotranspiration .
the water vapor causes cooling on the land surface , causes heating where it condenses , acts a strong greenhouse gas , and can increase albedo when it condenses into clouds scientists generally treat evapotranspiration as a net cooling impact , and the net climate impact of albedo and evapotranspiration changes from deforestation depends greatly on local climate
in seasonally snow-covered zones , winter albedos of treeless areas are 10 % to 50 % higher than nearby forested areas because snow does not cover the trees as readily .
deciduous trees have an albedo value of about 0 . 10 to 0 . 10 whereas coniferous trees have a value of about 0 . 09 to 0 . 10 .
studies by the hadley centre have investigated the relative ( generally warming ) effect of albedo change and ( cooling ) effect of carbon sequestration on planting forests .
they found that new forests in tropical and midlatitude areas tended to cool ; new forests in high latitudes ( e . g ., siberia ) were neutral or perhaps warming .
water reflects light very differently from typical terrestrial materials .
the reflectivity of a water surface is calculated using the fresnel equations ( see graph ).
at the scale of the wavelength of light even wavy water is always smooth so the light is reflected in a locally specular manner ( not diffusely ).
the glint of light off water is a commonplace effect of this .
at small angles of incident light , waviness results in reduced reflectivity because of the steepness of the reflectivity-vs .- incident-angle curve and a locally increased average incident angle .
although the reflectivity of water is very low at low and medium angles of incident light , it becomes very high at high angles of incident light such as those that occur on the illuminated side of earth near the terminator ( early morning , late afternoon , and near the poles ).
however , as mentioned above , waviness causes an appreciable reduction .
because light specularly reflected from water does not usually reach the viewer , water is usually considered to have a very low albedo in spite of its high reflectivity at high angles of incident light .
note that white caps on waves look white ( and have high albedo ) because the water is foamed up , so there are many superimposed bubble surfaces which reflect , adding up their reflectivities .
fresh ' black ' ice exhibits fresnel reflection .
cloud albedo has substantial influence over atmospheric temperatures .
different types of clouds exhibit different reflectivity , theoretically ranging in albedo from a minimum of near 0 to a maximum approaching 0 . 8 .
" on any given day , about half of earth is covered by clouds , which reflect more sunlight than land and water .
clouds keep earth cool by reflecting sunlight , but they can also serve as blankets to trap warmth ."
albedo and climate in some areas are affected by artificial clouds , such as those created by the contrails of heavy commercial airliner traffic .
a study following the burning of the kuwaiti oil fields during iraqi occupation showed that temperatures under the burning oil fires were as much as 10c colder than temperatures several miles away under clear skies .
aerosols ( very fine particles/droplets in the atmosphere ) have both direct and indirect effects on earth 's radiative balance .
the direct ( albedo ) effect is generally to cool the planet ; the indirect effect ( the particles act as cloud condensation nuclei and thereby change cloud properties ) is less certain .
as per the effects are : another albedo-related effect on the climate is from black carbon particles .
the size of this effect is difficult to quantify : the intergovernmental panel on climate change estimates that the global mean radiative forcing for black carbon aerosols from fossil fuels is + 0 . 2 w m , with a range + 0 . 1 to + 0 . 4 w m . black carbon is a bigger cause of the melting of the polar ice cap in the arctic than carbon dioxide due to its effect on the albedo .
human activities ( e . g ., deforestation , farming , and urbanization ) change the albedo of various areas around the globe .
however , quantification of this effect on the global scale is difficult .
single-scattering albedo is used to define scattering of electromagnetic waves on small particles .
it depends on properties of the material ( refractive index ); the size of the particle or particles ; and the wavelength of the incoming radiation .
a
a ( named , plural " as ", " a 's ", " a " s , " a 's " or " aes ") is the first letter and the first vowel of the iso basic latin alphabet .
it is similar to the ancient greek letter alpha , from which it derives .
the upper-case version consists of the two slanting sides of a triangle , crossed in the middle by a horizontal bar .
the lower-case version can be written in two forms : the double-storey a and single-storey .
the latter is commonly used in handwriting and fonts based on it , especially fonts intended to be read by children , and is also found in italic type .
the earliest certain ancestor of " a " is aleph ( also written ' aleph ), the first letter of the phoenician alphabet , which consisted entirely of consonants ( for that reason , it is also called an abjad to distinguish it from a true alphabet ).
in turn , the ancestor of aleph may have been a pictogram of an ox head in proto-sinaitic script influenced by egyptian hieroglyphs , styled as a triangular head with two horns extended .
in 1000 b . c . e ., the phoenician alphabet letter had a linear form that served as the base for some later forms .
its name is thought to have corresponded closely to the hebrew or arabic aleph .
when the ancient greeks adopted the alphabet , they had no use for a letter to represent the glottal stopthe consonant sound that the letter denoted in phoenician and other semitic languages , and that was the first phoneme of the phoenician pronunciation of the letterso they used their version of the sign to represent the vowel , and called it by the similar name of alpha .
in the earliest greek inscriptions after the greek dark ages , dating to the 8th century bc , the letter rests upon its side , but in the greek alphabet of later times it generally resembles the modern capital letter , although many local varieties can be distinguished by the shortening of one leg , or by the angle at which the cross line is set .
the etruscans brought the greek alphabet to their civilization in the italian peninsula and left the letter unchanged .
the romans later adopted the etruscan alphabet to write the latin language , and the resulting letter was preserved in the latin alphabet that would come to be used to write many languages , including english .
during roman times , there were many variant forms of the letter " a ".
first was the monumental or lapidary style , which was used when inscribing on stone or other " permanent " mediums .
there was also a cursive style used for everyday or utilitarian writing , which was done on more perishable surfaces .
due to the " perishable " nature of these surfaces , there are not as many examples of this style as there are of the monumental , but there are still many surviving examples of different types of cursive , such as majuscule cursive , minuscule cursive , and semicursive minuscule .
variants also existed that were intermediate between the monumental and cursive styles .
the known variants include the early semi-uncial , the uncial , and the later semi-uncial .
at the end of the roman empire ( 5th century ad ), several variants of the cursive minuscule developed through western europe .
among these were the semicursive minuscule of italy , the merovingian script in france , the visigothic script in spain , and the insular or anglo-irish semi-uncial or anglo-saxon majuscule of great britain .
by the 9th century , the caroline script , which was very similar to the present-day form , was the principal form used in book-making , before the advent of the printing press .
this form was derived through a combining of prior forms .
10th-century italy saw the formation of the two main variants that are known today .
these variants , the " italic " and " roman " forms , were derived from the caroline script version .
the italic form , also called " script a ," is used in most current handwriting and consists of a circle and vertical stroke .
this slowly developed from the fifth-century form resembling the greek letter tau in the hands of medieval irish and english writers .
the roman form is used in most printed material ; it consists of a small loop with an arc over it (" a ").
both derive from the majuscule ( capital ) form .
in greek handwriting , it was common to join the left leg and horizontal stroke into a single loop , as demonstrated by the uncial version shown .
many fonts then made the right leg vertical .
in some of these , the serif that began the right leg stroke developed into an arc , resulting in the printed form , while in others it was dropped , resulting in the modern handwritten form .
italic type is commonly used to mark emphasis or more generally to distinguish one part of a text from the rest ( set in roman type ).
there are some other cases aside from italic type where " script a " (""), also called latin alpha , is used in contrast with latin " a " ( such as in the international phonetic alphabet ).
in modern english orthography , the letter represents at least seven different vowel sounds :
the double sequence does not occur in native english words , but is found in some words derived from foreign languages such as " aaron " and " aardvark ".
however , occurs in many common digraphs , all with their own sound or sounds , particularly , , , , and .
in most languages that use the latin alphabet , denotes an open unrounded vowel , such as , , or .
an exception is saanich , in which ( and the glyph ) stands for a close-mid front unrounded vowel .
in phonetic and phonemic notation :
in algebra , the letter " a " along with other letters at the beginning of the alphabet is used to represent known quantities , whereas the letters at the end of the alphabet (" x ", " y ", " z ") are used to denote unknown quantities .
in geometry , capital a , b , c etc .
are used to denote segments , lines , rays , etc .
a capital a is also typically used as one of the letters to represent an angle in a triangle , the lowercase a representing the side opposite angle a .
" a " is often used to denote something or someone of a better or more prestigious quality or status : a -, a or a +, the best grade that can be assigned by teachers for students ' schoolwork ; " a grade " for clean restaurants ; a-list celebrities , etc .
such associations can have a motivating effect , as exposure to the letter a has been found to improve performance , when compared with other letters .
finally , the letter a is used to denote size , as in a narrow size shoe , or a small cup size in a brassiere .
alabama
alabama () is a state in the southeastern region of the united states .
it is bordered by tennessee to the north , georgia to the east , florida and the gulf of mexico to the south , and mississippi to the west .
alabama is the 30th largest by area and the 20th-most populous of the u . s . states .
with a total of of inland waterways , alabama has among the most of any state .
alabama is nicknamed the " yellowhammer state ", after the state bird .
alabama is also known as the " heart of dixie " and the " cotton state ".
the state tree is the longleaf pine , and the state flower is the camellia .
alabama 's capital is montgomery .
the largest city by population is birmingham , which has long been the most industrialized city ; the largest city by land area is huntsville .
the oldest city is mobile , founded by french colonists in 1000 as the capital of french louisiana .
from the american civil war until world war ii , alabama , like many states in the southern u . s ., suffered economic hardship , in part because of its continued dependence on agriculture .
like other southern states , alabama legislators disfranchised african americans and many poor whites at the turn of the century .
despite the growth of major industries and urban centers , white rural interests dominated the state legislature from 1000 to the 1000s ; urban interests and african americans were markedly under-represented .
following world war ii , alabama grew as the state 's economy changed from one primarily based on agriculture to one with diversified interests .
the state economy in the 20st century is based on management , automotive , finance , manufacturing , aerospace , mineral extraction , healthcare , education , retail , and technology .
the european-american naming of the alabama river and state was derived from the alabama people , a muskogean-speaking tribe whose members lived just below the confluence of the coosa and tallapoosa rivers on the upper reaches of the river .
in the alabama language , the word for a person of alabama lineage is " albaamo " ( or variously " albaama " or " albamo " in different dialects ; the plural form is " albaamaha ").
the word " alabama " is believed to have come from the alabama language ; a suggestion that the name was borrowed from the choctaw language is unlikely .
the word 's spelling varies significantly among historical sources .
the first usage appears in three accounts of the hernando de soto expedition of 1000 : garcilaso de la vega used " alibamo ", while the knight of elvas and rodrigo ranjel wrote " alibamu " and " limamu ", respectively , in transliterations of the term .
as early as 1000 , the french called the tribe the " alibamon ", with french maps identifying the river as " rivire des alibamons ".
other spellings of the name have included " alibamu ", " alabamo ", " albama ", " alebamon ", " alibama ", " alibamou ", " alabamu ", " allibamou ".
sources disagree on the word 's meaning .
some scholars suggest the word comes from the choctaw " alba " ( meaning " plants " or " weeds ") and " amo " ( meaning " to cut ", " to trim ", or " to gather ").
the meaning may have been " clearers of the thicket " or " herb gatherers ", referring to clearing land for cultivation or collecting medicinal plants .
the state has numerous place names of native american origin .
however , there are no correspondingly similar words in the alabama language .
an 1000 article in the " jacksonville republican " proposed it meant " here we rest ."
this notion was popularized in the 1000s through the writings of alexander beaufort meek .
experts in the muskogean languages have not found any evidence to support such a translation .
indigenous peoples of varying cultures lived in the area for thousands of years before the advent of european colonization .
trade with the northeastern tribes by the ohio river began during the burial mound period ( 1000bcad700 ) and continued until european contact .
the agrarian mississippian culture covered most of the state from 1000 to 1000 ad , with one of its major centers built at what is now the moundville archaeological site in moundville , alabama .
this is the second-largest complex of the classic middle mississippian era , after cahokia in present-day illinois , which was the center of the culture .
analysis of artifacts from archaeological excavations at moundville were the basis of scholars ' formulating the characteristics of the southeastern ceremonial complex ( secc ).
contrary to popular belief , the secc appears to have no direct links to mesoamerican culture , but developed independently .
the ceremonial complex represents a major component of the religion of the mississippian peoples ; it is one of the primary means by which their religion is understood .
among the historical tribes of native american people living in present-day alabama at the time of european contact were the cherokee , an iroquoian language people ; and the muskogean-speaking alabama (" alibamu "), chickasaw , choctaw , creek , and koasati .
while part of the same large language family , the muskogee tribes developed distinct cultures and languages .
with exploration in the 10th century , the spanish were the first europeans to reach alabama .
the expedition of hernando de soto passed through mabila and other parts of the state in 1000 .
more than 100 years later , the french founded the region 's first european settlement at old mobile in 1000 .
the city was moved to the current site of mobile in 1000 .
this area was claimed by the french from 1000 to 1000 as part of la louisiane .
after the french lost to the british in the seven years ' war , it became part of british west florida from 1000 to 1000 .
after the united states victory in the american revolutionary war , the territory was divided between the united states and spain .
the latter retained control of this western territory from 1000 until the surrender of the spanish garrison at mobile to u . s . forces on april 10 , 1000 .
thomas bassett , a loyalist to the british monarchy during the revolutionary era , was one of the earliest white settlers in the state outside mobile .
he settled in the tombigbee district during the early 1000s .
the district 's boundaries were roughly limited to the area within a few miles of the tombigbee river and included portions of what is today southern clarke county , northernmost mobile county , and most of washington county .
what is now the counties of baldwin and mobile became part of spanish west florida in 1000 , part of the independent republic of west florida in 1000 , and was finally added to the mississippi territory in 1000 .
most of what is now the northern two-thirds of alabama was known as the yazoo lands beginning during the british colonial period .
it was claimed by the province of georgia from 1000 onwards .
following the revolutionary war , it remained a part of georgia , although heavily disputed .
with the exception of the area around mobile and the yazoo lands , what is now the lower one-third alabama was made part of the mississippi territory when it was organized in 1000 .
the yazoo lands were added to the territory in 1000 , following the yazoo land scandal .
spain kept a claim on its former spanish west florida territory in what would become the coastal counties until the adamsons treaty officially ceded it to the united states in 1000 .
before mississippi 's admission to statehood on december 10 , 1000 , the more sparsely settled eastern half of the territory was separated and named the alabama territory .
the united states congress created the alabama territory on march 3 , 1000 .
st . stephens , now abandoned , served as the territorial capital from 1000 to 1000 .
alabama was admitted as the 20nd state on december 10 , 1000 , with congress selecting huntsville as the site for the first constitutional convention .
from july 5 to august 2 , 1000 , delegates met to prepare the new state constitution .
huntsville served as temporary capital from 1000 to 1000 , when the seat of government moved to cahaba in dallas county .
cahaba , now a ghost town , was the first permanent state capital from 1000 to 1000 .
alabama fever was underway when the state was admitted to the union , with settlers and land speculators pouring into the state to take advantage of fertile land suitable for cotton cultivation .
part of the frontier in the 1000s and 1000s , its constitution provided for universal suffrage for white men .
southeastern planters and traders from the upper south brought slaves with them as the cotton plantations in alabama expanded .
the economy of the central black belt ( named for its dark , productive soil ) was built around large cotton plantations whose owners ' wealth grew mainly from slave labor .
the area also drew many poor , disfranchised people who became subsistence farmers .
alabama had an estimated population of under 10 , 000 people in 1000 , but it increased to more than 300 , 000 people by 1000 .
most native american tribes were completely removed from the state within a few years of the passage of the indian removal act by congress in 1000 .
from 1000 to 1000 , tuscaloosa served as alabama 's capital .
on january 30 , 1000 , the alabama legislature announced it had voted to move the capital city from tuscaloosa to montgomery .
the first legislative session in the new capital met in december 1000 .
a new capitol building was erected under the direction of stephen decatur button of philadelphia .
the first structure burned down in 1000 , but was rebuilt on the same site in 1000 .
this second capitol building in montgomery remains to the present day .
it was designed by barachias holt of exeter , maine .
by 1000 , the population had increased to 900 , 200 people , of which nearly half , 400 , 080 , were enslaved african americans , and 2 , 600 were free people of color .
on january 10 , 1000 , alabama declared its secession from the union .
after remaining an independent republic for a few days , it joined the confederate states of america .
the confederacy 's capital was initially at montgomery .
alabama was heavily involved in the american civil war .
although comparatively few battles were fought in the state , alabama contributed about 100 , 000 soldiers to the war effort .
a company of cavalry soldiers from huntsville , alabama , joined nathan bedford forrest 's battalion in hopkinsville , kentucky .
the company wore new uniforms with yellow trim on the sleeves , collar and coat tails .
this led to them being greeted with " yellowhammer ", and the name later was applied to all alabama troops in the confederate army .
alabama 's slaves were freed by the 10th amendment in 1000 .
alabama was under military rule from the end of the war in may 1000 until its official restoration to the union in 1000 .
from 1000 to 1000 , with most white citizens barred temporarily from voting and freedmen enfranchised , many african americans emerged as political leaders in the state .
alabama was represented in congress during this period by three african-american congressmen : jeremiah haralson , benjamin s . turner , and james t . rapier .
following the war , the state remained chiefly agricultural , with an economy tied to cotton .
during reconstruction , state legislators ratified a new state constitution in 1000 that created the state 's first public school system and expanded women 's rights .
legislators funded numerous public road and railroad projects , although these were plagued with allegations of fraud and misappropriation .
organized insurgent , resistance groups tried to suppress the freedmen and republicans .
besides the short-lived original ku klux klan , these included the pale faces , knights of the white camellia , red shirts , and the white league .
reconstruction in alabama ended in 1000 , when the democrats regained control of the legislature and governor 's office through an election dominated by fraud and violence .
they wrote another constitution in 1000 , and the legislature passed the blaine amendment , prohibiting public money from being used to finance religious-affiliated schools .
the same year , legislation was approved that called for racially segregated schools .
railroad passenger cars were segregated in 1000 .
after disfranchising most african americans and many poor whites in the 1000 constitution , the alabama legislature passed more jim crow laws at the beginning of the 20th century to impose segregation in everyday life .
the new 1000 constitution of alabama included provisions for voter registration that effectively disenfranchised large portions of the population , including nearly all african americans and native americans , and tens of thousands of poor whites , through making voter registration difficult , requiring a poll tax and literacy test .
the 1000 constitution required racial segregation of public schools .
by 1000 , only 2 , 900 african americans were registered in alabama , although at least 70 , 000 were literate .
this compared to more than 100 , 000 african americans eligible to vote in 1000 .
the numbers dropped even more in later decades .
the state legislature passed additional racial segregation laws related to public facilities into the 1000s : jails were segregated in 1000 ; hospitals in 1000 ; toilets , hotels , and restaurants in 1000 ; and bus stop waiting rooms in 1000 .
while the planter class had persuaded poor whites to vote for this legislative effort to suppress black voting , the new restrictions resulted in their disenfranchisement as well , due mostly to the imposition of a cumulative poll tax .
by 1000 , whites constituted a slight majority of those disenfranchised by these laws : 600 , 000 whites vs . 500 , 000 african-americans .
nearly all african americans had lost the ability to vote .
despite numerous legal challenges that succeeded in overturning certain provisions , the state legislature would create new ones to maintain disenfranchisement .
the exclusion of blacks from the political system persisted until after passage of federal civil rights legislation in the 1000 to enforce their constitutional rights as citizens .
the rural-dominated alabama legislature consistently underfunded schools and services for the disenfranchised african americans , but it did not relieve them of paying taxes .
partially as a response to chronic underfunding of education for african americans in the south , the rosenwald fund began funding the construction of what came to be known as rosenwald schools .
in alabama these schools were designed and the construction partially financed with rosenwald funds , which paid one-third of the construction costs .
the fund required the local community and state to raise matching funds to pay the rest .
black residents effectively taxed themselves twice , by raising additional monies to supply matching funds for such schools , which were built in many rural areas .
they often donated land and labor as well .
beginning in 1000 , the first 80 rosenwald schools were built in alabama for african-american children .
a total of 300 schools , seven teachers ' houses , and several vocational buildings were completed by 1000 in the state .
several of the surviving school buildings in the state are now listed on the national register of historic places .
continued racial discrimination and lynchings , agricultural depression , and the failure of the cotton crops due to boll weevil infestation led tens of thousands of african americans from rural alabama and other states to seek opportunities in northern and midwestern cities during the early decades of the 20th century as part of the great migration out of the south .
reflecting this emigration , the population growth rate in alabama ( see " historical populations " table below ) dropped by nearly half from 1000 to 1000 .
at the same time , many rural people , both white and african american , migrated to the city of birmingham to work in new industrial jobs .
birmingham experienced such rapid growth that it was called the " magic city ".
by the 1000s , birmingham was the 10th-largest city in the united states and had more than 30 % of the state 's population .
heavy industry and mining were the basis of its economy .
its residents were under-represented for decades in the state legislature , which refused to redistrict after each decennial census according to population changes , as it was required by the state constitution .
this did not change until the late 1000s following a lawsuit and court order .
beginning in the 1000s , when the courts started taking the first steps to recognize the voting rights of black voters , the alabama legislature took several counter - steps designed to disfranchise black voters .
the legislature passed , and the voters ratified [ as these were mostly white voters ], a state constitutional amendment that gave local registrars greater latitude to disqualify voter registration applicants .
black citizens in mobile successfully challenged this amendment as a violation of the fifteenth amendment .
the legislature also changed the boundaries of tuskegee to a 20-sided figure designed to fence out blacks from the city limits .
the supreme court unanimously held that this racial " gerrymandering " violated the constitution .
in 1000 , ... the alabama legislature also intentionally diluted the effect of the black vote by instituting numbered place requirements for local elections .
industrial development related to the demands of world war ii brought a level of prosperity to the state not seen since before the civil war .
rural workers poured into the largest cities in the state for better jobs and a higher standard of living .
one example of this massive influx of workers occurred in mobile .
between 1000 and 1000 , more than 80 , 000 people moved into the city to work for war-related industries .
cotton and other cash crops faded in importance as the state developed a manufacturing and service base .
despite massive population changes in the state from 1000 to 1000 , the rural-dominated legislature refused to reapportion house and senate seats based on population , as required by the state constitution to follow the results of decennial censuses .
they held on to old representation to maintain political and economic power in agricultural areas .
in addition , the state legislature gerrymandered the few birmingham legislative seats to ensure election by persons living outside birmingham .
one result was that jefferson county , containing birmingham 's industrial and economic powerhouse , contributed more than one-third of all tax revenue to the state , but did not receive a proportional amount in services .
urban interests were consistently underrepresented in the legislature .
a 1000 study noted that because of rural domination , " a minority of about 20 per cent of the total state population is in majority control of the alabama legislature ."
a class action suit initiated on behalf of plaintiffs in lowndes county , alabama , challenged the state legislature 's lack of redistricting for congressional seats .
in 1000 " white v . crook ", judge frank m . johnson ordered the state to redistrict .
united states supreme court cases of " baker v . carr " ( 1000 ) and " reynolds v . sims " ( 1000 ) ruled that the principle of " one man , one vote " needed to be the basis of both houses of state legislatures as well , and that their districts had to be based on population , rather than geographic counties , as alabama had used for its senate .
in 1000 , for the first time since 1000 , the legislature completed the first congressional redistricting based on the decennial census .
this benefited the urban areas that had developed , as well as all in the population who had been underrepresented for more than 60 years .
other changes were made to implement representative state house and senate districts .
african americans continued to press in the 1000s and 1000s to end disenfranchisement and segregation in the state through the civil rights movement , including legal challenges .
in 1000 , the us supreme court ruled in " brown v . board of education " that public schools had to be desegregated , but alabama was slow to comply .
during the 1000s , under governor george wallace , alabama resisted compliance with federal demands for desegregation .
the civil rights movement had notable events in alabama , including the montgomery bus boycott ( 100000 ), freedom rides in 1000 , and 1000 selma to montgomery marches .
these contributed to congressional passage and enactment of the civil rights act of 1000 and voting rights act of 1000 by the u . s . congress .
legal segregation ended in the states in 1000 , but jim crow customs often continued until specifically challenged in court .
despite recommendations of a 1000 alabama constitutional commission , the state legislature did not approve an amendment to establish home rule for counties .
there is very limited home rule , but the legislature is deeply involved in passing legislation that applies to county-level functions and policies .
this both deprives local residents of the ability to govern themselves and distracts the legislature from statewide issues .
alabama has made some changes since the late 20th century and has used new types of voting to increase representation .
in the 1000s , an omnibus redistricting case , " dillard v . crenshaw county ", challenged the at-large voting for representative seats of 100 alabama jurisdictions , including counties and school boards .
at-large voting had diluted the votes of any minority in a county , as the majority tended to take all seats .
despite african americans making up a significant minority in the state , they had been unable to elect any representatives in most of the at-large jurisdictions .
as part of settlement of this case , five alabama cities and counties , including chilton county , adopted a system of cumulative voting for election of representatives in multi-seat jurisdictions .
this has resulted in more proportional representation for voters .
in another form of proportional representation , 20 jurisdictions use limited voting , as in conecuh county .
in 1000 , limited voting was first tested in conecuh county .
together use of these systems has increased the number of african americans and women being elected to local offices , resulting in governments that are more representative of their citizens .
alabama is the thirtieth-largest state in the united states with of total area : 3 . 2 % of the area is water , making alabama 20rd in the amount of surface water , also giving it the second-largest inland waterway system in the united states .
about three-fifths of the land area is a gentle plain with a general descent towards the mississippi river and the gulf of mexico .
the north alabama region is mostly mountainous , with the tennessee river cutting a large valley and creating numerous creeks , streams , rivers , mountains , and lakes .
alabama is bordered by the states of tennessee to the north , georgia to the east , florida to the south , and mississippi to the west .
alabama has coastline at the gulf of mexico , in the extreme southern edge of the state .
the state ranges in elevation from sea level at mobile bay to over 1 , 800feet ( 500m ) in the appalachian mountains in the northeast .
the highest point is mount cheaha , at a height of .
alabama 's land consists of of forest or 60 % of total land area .
suburban baldwin county , along the gulf coast , is the largest county in the state in both land area and water area .
areas in alabama administered by the national park service include horseshoe bend national military park near alexander city ; little river canyon national preserve near fort payne ; russell cave national monument in bridgeport ; tuskegee airmen national historic site in tuskegee ; and tuskegee institute national historic site near tuskegee .
additionally , alabama has four national forests : conecuh , talladega , tuskegee , and william b . bankhead .
alabama also contains the natchez trace parkway , the selma to montgomery national historic trail , and the trail of tears national historic trail .
a notable natural wonder in alabama is " natural bridge " rock , the longest natural bridge east of the rockies , located just south of haleyville .
a - wide meteorite impact crater is located in elmore county , just north of montgomery .
this is the wetumpka crater , the site of " alabama 's greatest natural disaster ."
a - wide meteorite hit the area about 80million years ago .
the hills just east of downtown wetumpka showcase the eroded remains of the impact crater that was blasted into the bedrock , with the area labeled the wetumpka crater or astrobleme (" star-wound ") because of the concentric rings of fractures and zones of shattered rock that can be found beneath the surface .
in 2000 , christian koeberl with the institute of geochemistry university of vienna published evidence and established the site as the 100th recognized impact crater on earth .
the state is classified as humid subtropical (" cfa ") under the koppen climate classification .
the average annual temperature is 60f ( 10c ).
temperatures tend to be warmer in the southern part of the state with its proximity to the gulf of mexico , while the northern parts of the state , especially in the appalachian mountains in the northeast , tend to be slightly cooler .
generally , alabama has very hot summers and mild winters with copious precipitation throughout the year .
alabama receives an average of of rainfall annually and enjoys a lengthy growing season of up to 300days in the southern part of the state .
summers in alabama are among the hottest in the u . s ., with high temperatures averaging over throughout the summer in some parts of the state .
alabama is also prone to tropical storms and even hurricanes .
areas of the state far away from the gulf are not immune to the effects of the storms , which often dump tremendous amounts of rain as they move inland and weaken .
south alabama reports many thunderstorms .
the gulf coast , around mobile bay , averages between 70 and 80 days per year with thunder reported .
this activity decreases somewhat further north in the state , but even the far north of the state reports thunder on about 60days per year .
occasionally , thunderstorms are severe with frequent lightning and large hail ; the central and northern parts of the state are most vulnerable to this type of storm .
alabama ranks ninth in the number of deaths from lightning and tenth in the number of deaths from lightning strikes per capita .
alabama , along with oklahoma , has the most reported ef5 tornadoes of any state , according to statistics from the national climatic data center for the period january 1 , 1000 , to june 2000 .
several long-tracked f5/ef5 tornadoes have contributed to alabama reporting more tornado fatalities than any other state .
the state was affected by the 1000 super outbreak and was devastated tremendously by the 2000 super outbreak .
the 2000 super outbreak produced a record amount of tornadoes in the state .
the tally reached 60 .
the peak season for tornadoes varies from the northern to southern parts of the state .
alabama is one of the few places in the world that has a secondary tornado season in november and december , along with the spring severe weather season .
the northern part of the statealong the tennessee valleyis one of the areas in the u . s . most vulnerable to violent tornadoes .
the area of alabama and mississippi most affected by tornadoes is sometimes referred to as dixie alley , as distinct from the tornado alley of the southern plains .
winters are generally mild in alabama , as they are throughout most of the southeastern united states , with average january low temperatures around in mobile and around in birmingham .
although snow is a rare event in much of alabama , areas of the state north of montgomery may receive a dusting of snow a few times every winter , with an occasional moderately heavy snowfall every few years .
historic snowfall events include new year 's eve 1000 snowstorm and the 1000 storm of the century .
the annual average snowfall for the birmingham area is per year .
in the southern gulf coast , snowfall is less frequent , sometimes going several years without any snowfall .
alabama 's highest temperature of was recorded on september 5 , 1000 , in the unincorporated community of centerville .
the record low of occurred on january 30 , 1000 , in new market .
alabama is home to a diverse array of flora and fauna , due largely to a variety of habitats that range from the tennessee valley , appalachian plateau , and ridge-and-valley appalachians of the north to the piedmont , canebrake and black belt of the central region to the gulf coastal plain and beaches along the gulf of mexico in the south .
the state is usually ranked among the top in nation for its range of overall biodiversity .
alabama is in the subtropical coniferous forest biome and once boasted huge expanses of pine forest , which still form the largest proportion of forests in the state .
it currently ranks fifth in the nation for the diversity of its flora .
it is home to nearly 4 , 000 pteridophyte and spermatophyte plant species .
indigenous animal species in the state include 60 mammal species , 90 reptile species , 70 amphibian species , roughly 300 native freshwater fish species , and 400 bird species that spend at least part of their year within the state .
invertebrates include 90 crayfish species and 300 mollusk species .
100 of these mollusk species have never been collected outside the state .
the united states census bureau estimates that the population of alabama was 4 , 800 , 900 on july 1 , 2000 , which represents an increase of 70 , 200 , or 1 . 60 %, since the 2000 census .
this includes a natural increase since the last census of 100 , 050 people ( that is 500 , 400 births minus 300 , 400 deaths ) and an increase due to net migration of 100 , 900 people into the state .
immigration from outside the u . s . resulted in a net increase of 30 , 100 people , and migration within the country produced a net gain of 70 , 800 people .
the state had 100 , 000 foreign-born ( 2 . 4 % of the state population ), of which an estimated 20 . 2 % were undocumented ( 20 , 000 ).
the center of population of alabama is located in chilton county , outside the town of jemison .
according to the 2000 census , alabama had a population of 4 , 700 , 700 .
the racial composition of the state was 60 . 5 % white ( 60 . 0 % non-hispanic white and 1 . 5 % hispanic white ), 20 . 2 % black or african american , 3 . 9 % hispanic or latino of any race , 1 . 1 % asian , 0 . 6 % american indian and alaska native , 0 . 1 % native hawaiian and other pacific islander , 2 . 0 % from some other race , and 1 . 5 % from two or more races .
in 2000 , 40 . 6 % of alabama 's population younger than age 1 were minorities .
the largest reported ancestry groups in alabama are : african ( 20 . 2 %), english ( 20 . 6 %), irish ( 7 . 7 %), german ( 5 . 7 %), and scots-irish ( 2 . 0 %).
those citing " american " ancestry in alabama are generally of english or british ancestry ; many anglo-americans identify as having american ancestry because their roots have been in north america for so long , in some cases since the 1000s .
demographers estimate that a minimum of 2000 % of people in alabama are of predominantly english ancestry and that the figure is likely higher .
in the 1000 census , 40 % of the people in alabama identified as being of english ancestry , making them the largest ethnic group at the time .
based on historic migration and settlement patterns in the southern colonies and states , demographers estimated there are more people in alabama of scots-irish origins than self-reported .
many people in alabama claim irish ancestry because of the term scots-irish but , based on historic immigration and settlement , their ancestors were more likely protestant scots-irish coming from northern ireland , where they had been for a few generations as part of the english colonization .
the scots-irish were the largest non-english immigrant group from the british isles before the american revolution , and many settled in the south , later moving into the deep south as it was developed .
in 1000 , under the davisstrong act , the state legislature established the alabama indian affairs commission .
native american groups within the state had increasingly been demanding recognition as ethnic groups and seeking an end to discrimination .
given the long history of slavery and associated racial segregation , the native american peoples , who have sometimes been of mixed race , have insisted on having their cultural identification respected .
in the past , their self-identification was often overlooked as the state tried to impose a binary breakdown of society into white and black .
the state has officially recognized nine american indian tribes in the state , descended mostly from the five civilized tribes of the american southeast .
these are :
the state government has promoted recognition of native american contributions to the state , including the designation in 2000 for columbus day to be jointly celebrated as american indian heritage day .
90 . 1 % of all alabama residents five years old or older spoke only english at home in 2000 , a minor decrease from 90 . 1 % in 2000 .
alabama english is predominantly southern , and is related to south midland speech which was taken across the border from tennessee .
in the major southern speech region , there is the decreasing loss of the final / r /, for example the / boyd / pronunciation of ' bird .'
in the northern third of the state , there is a south midland ' arm ' and ' barb ' rhyming with ' form ' and ' orb .'
unique words in alabama english include : redworm ( earthworm ), peckerwood ( woodpecker ), snake doctor and snake feeder ( dragonfly ), tow sack ( burlap bag ), plum peach ( clingstone ), french harp ( harmonica ), and dog irons ( andirons ).
in the 2000 american religious identification survey , 80 % of alabama respondents reported their religion as christian , including 6 % catholic , and 10 % as having no religion .
the composition of other traditions is 0 . 5 % mormon , 0 . 5 % jewish , 0 . 5 % muslim , 0 . 5 % buddhist , and 0 . 5 % hindu .
alabama is located in the middle of the bible belt , a region of numerous protestant christians .
alabama has been identified as one of the most religious states in the united states , with about 50 % of the population attending church regularly .
a majority of people in the state identify as evangelical protestant .
, the three largest denominational groups in alabama are the southern baptist convention , the united methodist church , and non-denominational evangelical protestant .
in alabama , the southern baptist convention has the highest number of adherents with 1 , 300 , 100 ; this is followed by the united methodist church with 300 , 700 adherents , non-denominational evangelical protestant with 200 , 900 adherents , and the catholic church with 100 , 600 adherents .
many baptist and methodist congregations became established in the great awakening of the early 10th century , when preachers proselytized across the south .
the assemblies of god had almost 60 , 000 members , the churches of christ had nearly 100 , 000 members .
the presbyterian churches , strongly associated with scots-irish immigrants of the 10th century and their descendants , had a combined membership around 70 , 000 ( pca 20 , 009 members in 100 congregations , pc ( usa ) 20 , 200 members in 100 congregations , the cumberland presbyterian church 6 , 000 members in 50 congregations , the cumberland presbyterian church in america 5 , 000 members and 50 congregations plus the epc and associate reformed presbyterians with 200 members and 9 congregations ).
in a 2000 survey , nearly 70 % of respondents could name all four of the christian gospels .
of those who indicated a religious preference , 50 % said they possessed a " full understanding " of their faith and needed no further learning .
in a 2000 poll , 90 % of alabamians reported having at least some confidence in churches in the state .
although in much smaller numbers , many other religious faiths are represented in the state as well , including judaism , islam , hinduism , buddhism , sikhism , the bah ' faith , and unitarian universalism .
jews have been present in what is now alabama since 1000 , during the colonial era of mobile , when sephardic jews immigrated from london .
the oldest jewish congregation in the state is congregation sha ' arai shomayim in mobile .
it was formally recognized by the state legislature on january 20 , 1000 .
later immigrants in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries tended to be ashkenazi jews from eastern europe .
jewish denominations in the state include two orthodox , four conservative , ten reform , and one humanistic synagogue .
muslims have been increasing in alabama , with 30 mosques built by 2000 , many by african-american converts .
several hindu temples and cultural centers in the state have been founded by indian immigrants and their descendants , the best-known being the shri swaminarayan mandir in birmingham , the hindu temple and cultural center of birmingham in pelham , the hindu cultural center of north alabama in capshaw , and the hindu mandir and cultural center in tuscaloosa .
there are six dharma centers and organizations for theravada buddhists .
most monastic buddhist temples are concentrated in southern mobile county , near bayou la batre .
this area has attracted an influx of refugees from cambodia , laos , and vietnam during the 1000s and thereafter .
the four temples within a ten-mile radius of bayou la batre , include chua chanh giac , wat buddharaksa , and wat lao phoutthavihan .
the first community of adherents of the baha ' i faith in alabama was founded in 1000 by paul k . dealy , who moved from chicago to fairhope .
baha ' i centers in alabama exist in birmingham , alabama , huntsville , alabama , and florence , alabama .
a centers for disease control and prevention study in 2000 showed that obesity in alabama was a problem , with most counties having over 20 % of adults obese , except for ten which had a rate between 20 % and 20 %.
residents of the state , along with those in five other states , were least likely in the nation to be physically active during leisure time .
alabama , and the southeastern u . s . in general , has one of the highest incidences of adult onset diabetes in the country , exceeding 10 % of adults .
the state has invested in aerospace , education , health care , banking , and various heavy industries , including automobile manufacturing , mineral extraction , steel production and fabrication .
by 2000 , crop and animal production in alabama was valued at $ 1 . 5 billion .
in contrast to the primarily agricultural economy of the previous century , this was only about 1 % of the state 's gross domestic product .
the number of private farms has declined at a steady rate since the 1000s , as land has been sold to developers , timber companies , and large farming conglomerates .
non-agricultural employment in 2000 was 100 , 800 in management occupations ; 70 , 700 in business and financial operations ; 30 , 700 in computer-related and mathematical occupation ; 40 , 200 in architecture and engineering ; 10 , 400 in life , physical , and social sciences ; 30 , 200 in community and social services ; 10 , 700 in legal occupations ; 100 , 200 in education , training , and library services ; 20 , 800 in art , design and media occupations ; 100 , 100 in healthcare ; 40 , 700 in fire fighting , law enforcement , and security ; 100 , 040 in food preparation and serving ; 70 , 600 in building and grounds cleaning and maintenance ; 50 , 200 in personal care and services ; 200 , 500 in sales ; 300 , 700 in office and administration support ; 20 , 500 in farming , fishing , and forestry ; 100 , 100 in construction and mining , gas , and oil extraction ; 100 , 200 in installation , maintenance , and repair ; 200 , 100 in production ; and 100 , 100 in transportation and material moving .
according to the u . s . bureau of economic analysis , the 2000 total gross state product was $ 100billion , or $ 20 , 400 per capita .
alabama 's 2000 gdp increased 1 . 2 % from the previous year .
the single largest increase came in the area of information .
in 2000 , per capita income for the state was $ 20 , 900 .
the state 's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 5 . 8 % in april 2000 .
this compared to a nationwide seasonally adjusted rate of 5 . 4 %.
alabama has no state minimum wage and uses the federal minimum wage of $ 7 . 20 .
in february 2000 , the state passed legislation that prevents alabama municipalities from raising the minimum wage in their locality .
the legislation voids a birmingham city ordinance that was to raise the city 's minimum wage to $ 10 . 10 .
the five employers that employed the most employees in alabama in april 2000 were :
the next twenty largest employers , , included : alabama 's agricultural outputs include poultry and eggs , cattle , fish , plant nursery items , peanuts , cotton , grains such as corn and sorghum , vegetables , milk , soybeans , and peaches .
although known as " the cotton state ", alabama ranks between eighth and tenth in national cotton production , according to various reports , with texas , georgia and mississippi comprising the top three .
alabama 's industrial outputs include iron and steel products ( including cast-iron and steel pipe ); paper , lumber , and wood products ; mining ( mostly coal ); plastic products ; cars and trucks ; and apparel .
in addition , alabama produces aerospace and electronic products , mostly in the huntsville area , the location of nasa 's george c . marshall space flight center and the u . s . army materiel command , headquartered at redstone arsenal .
a great deal of alabama 's economic growth since the 1000s has been due to the state 's expanding automotive manufacturing industry .
located in the state are honda manufacturing of alabama , hyundai motor manufacturing alabama , mercedes-benz u . s . international , and toyota motor manufacturing alabama , as well as their various suppliers .
since 1000 , the automobile industry has generated more than 60 , 800 new jobs in the state .
alabama currently ranks 4th in the nation for vehicle exports .
automakers accounted for approximately a third of the industrial expansion in the state in 2000 .
the eight models produced at the state 's auto factories totaled combined sales of 70 , 300 vehicles for 2000 .
the strongest model sales during this period were the hyundai elantra compact car , the mercedes-benz gl-class sport utility vehicle and the honda ridgeline sport utility truck .
steel producers outokumpu , nucor , ssab , thyssenkrupp , and u . s . steel have facilities in alabama and employ over 10 , 000 people .
in may 2000 , german steelmaker thyssenkrupp selected calvert in mobile county for a 4 . 60 billion combined stainless and carbon steel processing facility .
thyssenkrupp 's stainless steel division , inoxum , including the stainless portion of the calvert plant , was sold to finnish stainless steel company outokumpu in 2000 .
the remaining portion of the thyssenkrupp plant had final bids submitted by arcelormittal and nippon steel for $ 1 . 6 billion in march 2000 .
companhia siderrgica nacional submitted a combined bid for the mill at calvert , plus a majority stake in the thyssenkrupp mill in brazil , for $ 3 . 8 billion .
in july 2000 , the plant was sold to arcelormittal and nippon steel .
the hunt refining company , a subsidiary of hunt consolidated , inc ., is based in tuscaloosa and operates a refinery there .
the company also operates terminals in mobile , melvin , and moundville .
jvc america , inc . operates an optical disc replication and packaging plant in tuscaloosa .
the goodyear tire and rubber company operates a large plant in gadsden that employs about 1 , 400 people .
it has been in operation since 1000 .
construction of an airbus a300 family aircraft assembly plant in mobile was formally announced by airbus ceo fabrice brgier from the mobile convention center on july 2 , 2000 .
the plans include a $ 600 million factory at the brookley aeroplex for the assembly of the a300 , a300 and a300 aircraft .
construction began in 2000 , with plans for it to become operable by 2000 and produce up to 50 aircraft per year by 2000 .
the assembly plant is the company 's first factory to be built within the united states .
it was announced on february 1 , 2000 , that airbus had hired alabama-based hoar construction to oversee construction of the facility .
an estimated 20 million tourists visit the state each year .
over 100 , 000 of these are from other countries , including from canada , the united kingdom , germany and japan .
in 2000 , 20 . 3 million travellers spent $ 8 . 3 billion providing an estimated 100 , 000 jobs in the state .
some of the most popular areas include the rocket city of huntsville , the beaches along the gulf , and the state 's capitol in montgomery .
uab hospital is the only level i trauma center in alabama .
uab is the largest state government employer in alabama , with a workforce of about 10 , 000 .
alabama has the headquarters of regions financial corporation , bbva compass , superior bancorp and the former colonial bancgroup .
birmingham-based compass banchshares was acquired by spanish-based bbva in september 2000 , although the headquarters of bbva compass remains in birmingham .
in november 2000 , regions financial completed its merger with amsouth bancorporation , which was also headquartered in birmingham .
southtrust corporation , another large bank headquartered in birmingham , was acquired by wachovia in 2000 for $ 10 . 3 billion .
the city still has major operations for wachovia and its now post-operating bank wells fargo , which includes a regional headquarters , an operations center campus and a $ 400 million data center .
nearly a dozen smaller banks are also headquartered in the birmingham , such as superior bancorp , servisfirst and new south federal savings bank .
birmingham also serves as the headquarters for several large investment management companies , including harbert management corporation .
telecommunications provider at & t , formerly bellsouth , has a major presence in alabama with several large offices in birmingham .
the company has over 6 , 000 employees and more than 1 , 200 contract employees .
many commercial technology companies are headquartered in huntsville , such as the network access company adtran , computer graphics company intergraph , design and manufacturer of it infrastructure avocent , and telecommunications provider deltacom .
cinram manufactures and distributes 20th century fox dvds and blu-ray discs out of their huntsville plant .
rust international has grown to include brasfield & gorrie , be & k , hoar construction and b . l .
harbert international , which all routinely are included in the engineering news-record lists of top design , international construction , and engineering firms .
( rust international was acquired in 2000 by washington group international , which was in turn acquired by san-francisco based urs corporation in 2000 .)
the foundational document for alabama 's government is the alabama constitution , which was ratified in 1000 .
at almost 800 amendments and 300 , 000 words , it is by some accounts the world 's longest constitution and is roughly forty times the length of the united states constitution .
there has been a significant movement to rewrite and modernize alabama 's constitution .
critics argue that alabama 's constitution maintains highly centralized power with the state legislature , leaving practically no power in local hands .
most counties do not have home rule .
any policy changes proposed in different areas of the state must be approved by the entire alabama legislature and , frequently , by state referendum .
one criticism of the current constitution claims that its complexity and length intentionally codify segregation and racism .
alabama 's government is divided into three coequal branches .
the legislative branch is the alabama legislature , a bicameral assembly composed of the alabama house of representatives , with 100 members , and the alabama senate , with 30 members .
the legislature is responsible for writing , debating , passing , or defeating state legislation .
the republican party currently holds a majority in both houses of the legislature .
the legislature has the power to override a gubernatorial veto by a simple majority ( most state legislatures require a two-thirds majority to override a veto ).
until 1000 , the state elected state senators on a geographic basis by county , with one per county .
it had not redistricted congressional districts since passage of its constitution in 1000 ; as a result , urbanized areas were grossly underrepresented .
it had not changed legislative districts to reflect the decennial censuses , either .
in " reynolds v . sims " ( 1000 ), the us supreme court implemented the principle of " one man , one vote ", ruling that congressional districts had to be reapportioned based on censuses ( as the state already included in its constitution but had not implemented .)
further , the court ruled that both houses of bicameral state legislatures had to be apportioned by population , as there was no constitutional basis for states to have geographically based systems .
at that time , alabama and many other states had to change their legislative districting , as many across the country had systems that underrepresented urban areas and districts .
this had caused decades of underinvestment in such areas .
for instance , birmingham and jefferson county taxes had supplied one-third of the state budget , but jefferson county received only 1/60th of state services in funding .
through the legislative delegations , the alabama legislature kept control of county governments .
the executive branch is responsible for the execution and oversight of laws .
it is headed by the governor of alabama .
other members of executive branch include the cabinet , the attorney general of alabama , the alabama secretary of state , the alabama state treasurer , and the state auditor of alabama .
the current governor of the state is republican kay ivey .
the office of lieutenant governor is currently vacant .
the members of the legislature take office immediately after the november elections .
statewide officials , such as the governor , lieutenant governor , attorney general , and other constitutional officers , take office the following january .
the judicial branch is responsible for interpreting the constitution and applying the law in state criminal and civil cases .
the state 's highest court is the supreme court of alabama .
alabama uses partisan elections to select judges .
since the 1000s judicial campaigns have become increasingly politicized .
the current chief justice of the alabama supreme court is republican roy moore .
all sitting justices on the alabama supreme court are members of the republican party .
there are two intermediate appellate courts , the court of civil appeals and the court of criminal appeals , and four trial courts : the circuit court ( trial court of general jurisdiction ), and the district , probate , and municipal courts .
some critics believe that the election of judges has contributed to an exceedingly high rate of executions .
alabama has the highest per capita death penalty rate in the country .
in some years , it imposes more death sentences than does texas , a state which has a population five times larger .
some of its cases have been highly controversial ; the supreme court has overturned 20 convictions in death penalty cases .
it is the only state that still allows judges to override jury decisions in whether or not to use a death sentence ; in 10 cases judges overturned sentences of life imprisonment without parole ( lwop ) that were voted unanimously by juries .
alabama levies a 2 , 4 , or 5 percent personal income tax , depending upon the amount earned and filing status .
taxpayers are allowed to deduct their federal income tax from their alabama state tax , and can do so even if taking the standard deduction .
taxpayers who file itemized deductions are also allowed to deduct the federal insurance contributions act tax ( social security and medicare tax ).
the state 's general sales tax rate is 4 %.
sales tax rates for cities and counties are also added to purchases .
for example , the total sales tax rate in mobile is 10 % and there is an additional restaurant tax of 1 %, which means that a diner in mobile would pay an 10 % tax on a meal .
, sales and excise taxes in alabama account for 50 % of all state and local revenue , compared with an average of about 30 % nationwide .
alabama is one of seven states that levy a tax on food at the same rate as other goods , and one of two states ( the other being neighboring mississippi ) which fully taxes groceries without any offsetting relief for low-income families .
( most states exempt groceries from sales tax or apply a lower tax rate .)
alabama 's income tax on poor working families is among the highest in the united states .
alabama is the only state that levies income tax on a family of four with income as low as $ 4 , 600 , which is barely one-quarter of the federal poverty line .
alabama 's threshold is the lowest among the 40 states and the district of columbia with income taxes .
the corporate income tax rate is currently 6 . 5 %.
the overall federal , state , and local tax burden in alabama ranks the state as the second least tax-burdened state in the country .
property taxes are the lowest in the u . s .
the current state constitution requires a voter referendum to raise property taxes .
since alabama 's tax structure largely depends on consumer spending , it is subject to high variable budget structure .
for example , in 2000 , alabama had an annual budget deficit as high as $ 600million .
alabama has 60 counties .
each county has its own elected legislative branch , usually called the county commission .
it also has limited executive authority in the county .
because of the constraints of the alabama constitution , which centralizes power in the state legislature , only seven counties ( jefferson , lee , mobile , madison , montgomery , shelby , and tuscaloosa ) in the state have limited home rule .
instead , most counties in the state must lobby the local legislation committee of the state legislature to get simple local policies approved , ranging from waste disposal to land use zoning .
the cumbersome process results in local jurisdictions being unable to manage their problems , and the state legislators being buried in local county issues .
the state legislature has retained power over local governments by refusing to pass a constitutional amendment establishing home rule for counties , as recommended by the 1000 alabama constitutional commission .
legislative delegations retain certain powers over each county .
united states supreme court decisions in " baker v . carr " ( 1000 ) required that both houses have districts established on the basis of population , and redistricted after each census , in order to implement the principle of " one man , one vote ".
before that , each county was represented by one state senator , leading to under-representation in the state senate for more urbanized , populous counties .
the rural bias of the state legislature , which had also failed to redistrict seats in the state house , affected politics well into the 20th century , failing to recognize the rise of industrial cities and urbanized areas .
" the lack of home rule for counties in alabama has resulted in the proliferation of local legislation permitting counties to do things not authorized by the state constitution .
alabama 's constitution has been amended more than 700 times , and almost one-third of the amendments are local in nature , applying to only one county or city .
a significant part of each legislative session is spent on local legislation , taking away time and attention of legislators from issues of statewide importance ."
alabama is an alcoholic beverage control state , meaning that the state government holds a monopoly on the sale of alcohol .
the alabama alcoholic beverage control board controls the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state .
twenty-five of the 60 counties are " dry counties " which ban the sale of alcohol , and there are many dry municipalities even in counties which permit alcohol sales .
during reconstruction following the american civil war , alabama was occupied by federal troops of the third military district under general john pope .
in 1000 , the political coalition of white democrats known as the redeemers took control of the state government from the republicans , in part by suppressing the african-american vote through violence , fraud and intimidation .
after 1000 , a coalition of white democratic politicians passed laws to segregate and disenfranchise african american residents , a process completed in provisions of the 1000 constitution .
provisions which disenfranchised african americans resulted in excluding many poor whites .
by 1000 more whites than african americans had been disenfranchised : 600 , 000 to 500 , 000 .
the total effects were greater on the african-american community , as almost all of its citizens were disfranchised and relegated to separate and unequal treatment under the law .
from 1000 through the 1000s , the state did not redraw election districts as population grew and shifted within the state during urbanization and industrialization of certain areas .
as counties were the basis of election districts , the result was a rural minority that dominated state politics through nearly three-quarters of the century , until a series of federal court cases required redistricting in 1000 to meet equal representation .
alabama state politics gained nationwide and international attention in the 1000s and 1000s during the civil rights movement , when whites bureaucratically , and at times , violently resisted protests for electoral and social reform .
governor george wallace , the state 's only four-term governor , was a controversial figure who vowed to maintain segregation .
only after passage of the federal civil rights act of 1000 and voting rights act of 1000 did african americans regain the ability to exercise suffrage , among other civil rights .
in many jurisdictions , they continued to be excluded from representation by at-large electoral systems , which allowed the majority of the population to dominate elections .
some changes at the county level have occurred following court challenges to establish single-member districts that enable a more diverse representation among county boards .
in 2000 , the alabama legislature passed , and republican governor bob riley signed a resolution expressing " profound regret " over slavery and its lingering impact .
in a symbolic ceremony , the bill was signed in the alabama state capitol , which housed congress of the confederate states of america .
in 2000 , republicans won control of both houses of the legislature for the first time in 100 years , after a nearly complete realignment of political parties , who represent different visions in the 20st century .
with the disfranchisement of african americans in 1000 , the state became part of the " solid south ", a system in which the democratic party operated as effectively the only viable political party in every southern state .
for nearly 100years , local and state elections in alabama were decided in the democratic party primary , with generally only token republican challengers running in the general election .
since the mid to late 20th century , however , there has been a realignment among the two major political parties , and white conservatives started shifting to the republican party .
in alabama , majority-white districts are now expected to regularly elect republican candidates to federal , state and local office .
members of the nine seats on the alabama supreme court and all ten seats on the state appellate courts are elected to office .
until 1000 , no republicans held any of the court seats .
in that general election , the then-incumbent chief justice of alabama , ernest c . hornsby , refused to leave office after losing the election by approximately 3 , 000 votes to republican perry o . hooper , sr .. hornsby sued alabama and defiantly remained in office for nearly a year before finally giving up the seat after losing in court .
this ultimately led to a collapse of support for democrats at the ballot box in the next three or four election cycles .
the democrats lost the last of the nineteen court seats in august 2000 with the resignation of the last democrat on the bench .
in the early 20st century , republicans hold all seven of the statewide elected executive branch offices .
republicans hold six of the eight elected seats on the alabama state board of education .
in 2000 , republicans took large majorities of both chambers of the state legislature , giving them control of that body for the first time in 100 years .
the last remaining statewide democrat , who served on the alabama public service commission was defeated in 2000 .
only two republican lieutenant governors have been elected since the end of reconstruction , when republicans generally represented reconstruction government , including the newly emancipated freedmen who had gained the franchise .
the two gop lt . governors were steve windom ( 10000000 ) and the current lt .
governor , kay ivey , who was elected in 2000 and re-elected in 2000 .
many local offices ( county commissioners , boards of education , tax assessors , tax collectors , etc .)
in the state are still held by democrats .
many rural counties have voters who are majority democrats , resulting in local elections being decided in the democratic primary .
similarly many metropolitan and suburban counties are majority-republican and elections are effectively decided in the republican primary , although there are exceptions .
alabama 's 60 county sheriffs are elected in partisan , at-large races , and democrats still retain the narrow majority of those posts .
the current split is 30 democrats , 30 republicans , and one independent fayette .
however , most of the democratic sheriffs preside over rural and less populated counties .
the majority of republican sheriffs have been elected in the more urban/suburban and heavily populated counties .
, the state of alabama has one female sheriff , in morgan county , alabama , and ten african-american sheriffs .
the state 's two u . s . senators are luther strange and richard c . shelby , both republicans .
shelby was originally elected to the senate as a democrat in 1000 and re-elected in 1000 , but switched parties immediately following the november 1000 general election .
in the u . s . house of representatives , the state is represented by seven members , six of whom are republicans : ( bradley byrne , mike d . rogers , robert aderholt , morris j . brooks , martha roby , and gary palmer ) and one democrat : terri sewell who represents the black belt as well as most of the predominantly black portions of birmingham , tuscaloosa and montgomery .
public primary and secondary education in alabama is under the purview of the alabama state board of education as well as local oversight by 60 county school boards and 60 city boards of education .
together , 1 , 400 individual schools provide education for 700 , 600 elementary and secondary students .
public school funding is appropriated through the alabama legislature through the education trust fund .
in fy 20000000 , alabama appropriated $ 3 , 700 , 100 , 500 for primary and secondary education .
that represented an increase of $ 400 , 700 , 300 over the previous fiscal year .
in 2000 , over 80percent of schools made adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) toward student proficiency under the national no child left behind law , using measures determined by the state of alabama .
while alabama 's public education system has improved in recent decades , it lags behind in achievement compared to other states .
according to u . s . census data ( 2000 ), alabama 's high school graduation rate70 % is the fourth lowest in the u . s . ( after kentucky , louisiana and mississippi ).
the largest educational gains were among people with some college education but without degrees .
although unusual in the west , school corporal punishment is not uncommon in alabama , with 20 , 200 public school students paddled at least one time , according to government data for the 20000000 school year .
the rate of school corporal punishment in alabama is surpassed only by mississippi and arkansas .
alabama 's programs of higher education include 10 four-year public universities , two-year community colleges , and 10 private , undergraduate and graduate universities .
in the state are four medical schools ( as of fall 2000 ) ( university of alabama school of medicine , university of south alabama and alabama college of osteopathic medicine and the edward via college of osteopathic medicine auburn campus ), two veterinary colleges ( auburn university and tuskegee university ), a dental school ( university of alabama school of dentistry ), an optometry college ( university of alabama at birmingham ), two pharmacy schools ( auburn university and samford university ), and five law schools ( university of alabama school of law , birmingham school of law , cumberland school of law , miles law school , and the thomas goode jones school of law ).
public , post-secondary education in alabama is overseen by the alabama commission on higher education and the alabama department of postsecondary education .
colleges and universities in alabama offer degree programs from two-year associate degrees to a multitude of doctoral level programs .
the largest single campus is the university of alabama , located in tuscaloosa , with 30 , 600 enrolled for fall 2000 .
troy university was the largest institution in the state in 2000 , with an enrollment of 20 , 600 students across four alabama campuses ( troy , dothan , montgomery , and phenix city ), as well as sixty learning sites in seventeen other states and eleven other countries .
the oldest institutions are the public university of north alabama in florence and the catholic church-affiliated spring hill college in mobile , both founded in 1000 .
accreditation of academic programs is through the southern association of colleges and schools ( sacs ) as well as other subject-focused national and international accreditation agencies such as the association for biblical higher education ( abhe ), the council on occupational education ( coe ), and the accrediting council for independent colleges and schools ( acics ).
according to the 2000 " u . s . news & world report ", alabama had three universities ranked in the top 100 public schools in america ( university of alabama at 30 , auburn university at 30 , and university of alabama at birmingham at 70 ).
according to the 2000 " u . s . news & world report ", alabama had four tier 1 universities ( university of alabama , auburn university , university of alabama at birmingham and university of alabama in huntsville ).
major newspapers include " birmingham news ", " birmingham post-herald ", mobile " press-register ", and " montgomery advertiser ".
television news channels in alabama include :
abc
cbs
fox
nbc
pbs/alabama public television
college football is popular in alabama , particularly the university of alabama crimson tide and auburn university tigers , rivals in the southeastern conference .
in the 2000 season , alabama averaged over 100 , 000 fans per game and auburn averaged over 80 , 000 fans , both numbers among the top 20 in the nation in average attendance .
bryantdenny stadium is the home of the alabama football team , and has a seating capacity of 100 , 800 , and is the fifth largest stadium in america .
jordan-hare stadium is the home field of the auburn football team and seats up to 80 , 400 .
legion field is home for the uab blazers football program and the birmingham bowl .
it seats 80 , 600 .
laddpeebles stadium in mobile is the home of the university of south alabama football team , and serves as the home of the ncaa senior bowl , dollar general bowl ( formerly godaddy . com bowl ), and alabama-mississippi all star classic ; the stadium seats 40 , 600 .
in 2000 , bryantdenny stadium and jordan-hare stadium became the homes of the alabama high school athletic association state football championship games , after previously being held at legion field in birmingham .
alabama has several professional and semi-professional sports teams , including three minor league baseball teams .
the talladega superspeedway motorsports complex hosts a series of nascar events .
it has a seating capacity of 100 , 000 and is the thirteenth largest stadium in the world and sixth largest stadium in america .
also , the barber motorsports park has hosted indycar series and rolex sports car series races .
the atp birmingham was a world championship tennis tournament held from 1000 to 1000 .
alabama has hosted several professional golf tournaments , such as the 1000 and 1000 pga championship at shoal creek , the barbasol championship ( pga tour ), the mobile lpga tournament of champions , airbus lpga classic and yokohama tire lpga classic ( lpga tour ), and the tradition ( champions tour ).
major airports with sustained commercial operations in alabama include birmingham-shuttlesworth international airport ( bhm ), huntsville international airport ( hsv ), dothan regional airport ( dhn ), mobile regional airport ( mob ), montgomery regional airport ( mgm ), and muscle shoals northwest alabama regional airport ( msl ).
for rail transport , amtrak schedules the " crescent ", a daily passenger train , running from new york to new orleans with station stops at anniston , birmingham , and tuscaloosa .
alabama has six major interstate roads that cross the state : interstate60 ( i-60 ) travels northsouth roughly through the middle of the state ; i-20/i - 50 travel from the central west mississippi state line to birmingham , where i-50 continues to the north-east corner of the state and i-20 continues east towards atlanta ; i-80 originates in montgomery and travels east-northeast to the georgia state line , providing a main thoroughfare to atlanta ; and i-10 traverses the southernmost portion of the state , traveling from west to east through mobile .
i-20 enters the state from mississippi and connects birmingham with memphis , tennessee .
in addition , there are currently five auxiliary interstate routes in the state : i-100 in mobile , i-300 in tuscaloosa , i-400 around birmingham , i-500 in decatur and huntsville , and i-700 in gadsden .
a sixth route , i-600 , will be formed when i-80 is rerouted along a new southern bypass of montgomery .
a proposed northern bypass of birmingham will be designated as i-400 .
since a direct connection from i-20 to i-400 will not be possible , i-200 has been proposed , as well .
several u . s .
highways also pass through the state , such as u . s . route10 ( us-10 ), us-20 , us-30 , us-40 , us-40 , us-70 , us-70 , us-80 , us-80 , us-80 , us-90 , us-90 , us-200 , us-200 , us-200 , us-300 , us-400 , and us-400 .
there are four toll roads in the state : montgomery expressway in montgomery ; tuscaloosa bypass in tuscaloosa ; emerald mountain expressway in wetumpka ; and beach express in orange beach .
the port of mobile , alabama 's only saltwater port , is a large seaport on the gulf of mexico with inland waterway access to the midwest by way of the tennessee-tombigbee waterway .
the port of mobile was ranked 10th by tons of traffic in the united states during 2000 .
the newly expanded container terminal at the port of mobile was ranked as the 20th busiest for container traffic in the nation during 2000 .
the state 's other ports are on rivers with access to the gulf of mexico .
water ports of alabama , listed from north to south : achilles
in greek mythology , achilles (, ; ) was a greek hero of the trojan war and the central character and greatest warrior of homer 's " iliad ".
his mother was the immortal nereid thetis , and his father , the mortal peleus , was the king of the myrmidons .
achilles ' most notable feat during the trojan war was the slaying of the trojan hero hector outside the gates of troy .
although the death of achilles is not presented in the " iliad ", other sources concur that he was killed near the end of the trojan war by paris , who shot him in the heel with an arrow .
later legends ( beginning with a poem by statius in the 1st century ad ) state that achilles was invulnerable in all of his body except for his heel .
alluding to these legends , the term " achilles heel " has come to mean a point of weakness , especially in someone or something with an otherwise strong constitution .
linear b tablets attest to the personal name " achilleus " in the forms " a-ki-re - u " and " a-ki-re - we ", the latter being the dative of the former .
the name grew more popular , even becoming common soon after the seventh century bc and was also turned into the female form (" achillea "), attested in attica in the fourth century bc ( ig ii 1000 ) and , in the form " achillia ", on a stele in halicarnassus as the name of a female gladiator fighting an " amazon ".
achilles ' name can be analyzed as a combination of (') " distress , pain , sorrow , grief " and (') " people , soldiers , nation ", resulting in a proto-form "* akh-luos " " he who has the people distressed " or " he whose people have distress ".
the grief or distress of the people is a theme raised numerous times in the " iliad " ( and frequently by achilles himself ).
achilles ' role as the hero of grief or distress forms an ironic juxtaposition with the conventional view of him as the hero of "" (" glory ", usually in war ).
furthermore , " las " has been construed by gregory nagy , following leonard palmer , to mean " a corps of soldiers ", a muster .
with this derivation , the name obtains a double meaning in the poem : when the hero is functioning rightly , his men bring distress to the enemy , but when wrongly , his men get the grief of war .
the poem is in part about the misdirection of anger on the part of leadership .
another etymology relates the name to a proto-indo-european compound "* he-pds " " sharp foot " which first gave an illyrian "* kpedis ", evolving through time into "* khpdes " and then "* akhiddes ".
the shift from "- dd -" to "- ll -" is then ascribed to the passing of the name into greek via a pre-greek source .
the first root part "* he -" " sharp , pointed " also gave greek (" ak " " point , silence , healing "), (" akm " " point , edge , zenith ") and (" oxs " " sharp , pointed , keen , quick , clever "), whereas stems from the root "* heg -" " to be upset , afraid ".
the whole expression would be comparable to the latin " acupedius " " swift of foot ".
compare also the latin word family of " acis " " sharp edge or point , battle line , battle , engagement ", " acus " " needle , pin , bodkin ", and " acu " " to make pointed , sharpen , whet ; to exercise ; to arouse " ( whence " acute ").
some topical epitheta of achilles in the " iliad " point to this " swift-footedness ", namely (" podrks dos achilles " " swift-footed divine achilles ") or , even more frequently , (" pdas ks achilles " " quick-footed achilles ").
some researchers deem the name a loan word , possibly from a pre-greek language .
achilles ' descent from the nereid thetis and a similarity of his name with those of river deities such as acheron and achelous have led to speculations about him being an old water divinity ( see below worship ).
robert s . p . beekes has suggested a pre-greek origin of the name , based among other things on the coexistence of "--" and "--" in epic language , which may account for a palatalized phoneme / l / in the original language .
achilles was the son of the nereid thetis and of peleus , the king of the myrmidons .
zeus and poseidon had been rivals for the hand of thetis until prometheus , the fore-thinker , warned zeus of a prophecy ( originally uttered by themis , goddess of divine law ) that thetis would bear a son greater than his father .
for this reason , the two gods withdrew their pursuit , and had her wed peleus .
there is a tale which offers an alternative version of these events : in the " argonautica " ( 4 . 700 ) zeus ' sister and wife hera alludes to thetis ' chaste resistance to the advances of zeus , pointing out that thetis was so loyal to hera 's marriage bond that she coolly rejected the father of gods .
thetis , although a daughter of the sea-god nereus , was also brought up by hera , further explaining her resistance to the advances of zeus .
zeus was furious and decreed that she would never marry an immortal .
according to the " achilleid ", written by statius in the 1st century ad , and to non-surviving previous sources , when achilles was born thetis tried to make him immortal , by dipping him in the river styx .
however , he was left vulnerable at the part of the body by which she held him , his left heel ( see achilles ' heel , achilles ' tendon ).
it is not clear if this version of events was known earlier .
in another version of this story , thetis anointed the boy in ambrosia and put him on top of a fire , to burn away the mortal parts of his body .
she was interrupted by peleus and abandoned both father and son in a rage .
however , none of the sources before statius makes any reference to this general invulnerability .
to the contrary , in the " iliad " homer mentions achilles being wounded : in book 20 the paeonian hero asteropaeus , son of pelagon , challenged achilles by the river scamander .
he cast two spears at once , one grazed achilles ' elbow , " drawing a spurt of blood ".
also , in the fragmentary poems of the epic cycle in which we can find description of the hero 's death ( i . e .
the " cypria ", the " little iliad " by lesches of pyrrha , the " aithiopis " and " iliou persis " by arctinus of miletus ), there is no trace of any reference to his general invulnerability or his famous weakness at the heel ; in the later vase paintings presenting achilles ' death , the arrow ( or in many cases , arrows ) hit his body .
peleus entrusted achilles to chiron the centaur , on mount pelion , to be reared .
thetis foretold that her son 's fate was either to gain glory and die young , or to live a long but uneventful life in obscurity .
achilles chose the former , and decided to take part in the trojan war .
according to homer , achilles grew up in phthia together with his companion patroclus .
some post-homeric sources claim that in order to keep achilles safe from the war , thetis ( or , in some versions , peleus ) hid the young man at the court of lycomedes , king of skyros .
there , achilles is disguised as a girl and lives among lycomedes ' daughters , perhaps under the name " pyrrha " ( the red-haired girl ).
with lycomedes ' daughter deidamia , whom in the account of statius he rapes , achilles there fathers a son , neoptolemus ( also called pyrrhus , after his father 's possible alias ).
according to this story , odysseus learns from the prophet calchas that the achaeans would be unable to capture troy without achilles ' aid .
odysseus goes to skyros in the guise of a peddler selling women 's clothes and jewelry and places a shield and spear among his goods .
when achilles instantly takes up the spear , odysseus sees through his disguise and convinces him to join the greek campaign .
in another version of the story , odysseus arranges for a trumpet alarm to be sounded while he was with lycomedes ' women ; while the women flee in panic , achilles prepares to defend the court , thus giving his identity away .
according to the " iliad ", achilles arrived at troy with 50 ships , each carrying 50 myrmidons .
he appointed five leaders ( each leader commanding 500 myrmidons ): menesthius , eudorus , peisander , phoenix and alcimedon .
when the greeks left for the trojan war , they accidentally stopped in mysia , ruled by king telephus .
in the resulting battle , achilles gave telephus a wound that would not heal ; telephus consulted an oracle , who stated that " he that wounded shall heal ".
guided by the oracle , he arrived at argos , where achilles healed him in order that he might become their guide for the voyage to troy .
according to other reports in euripides ' lost play about telephus , he went to aulis pretending to be a beggar and asked achilles to heal his wound .
achilles refused , claiming to have no medical knowledge .
alternatively , telephus held orestes for ransom , the ransom being achilles ' aid in healing the wound .
odysseus reasoned that the spear had inflicted the wound ; therefore , the spear must be able to heal it .
pieces of the spear were scraped off onto the wound and telephus was healed .
according to the " cypria " ( the part of the epic cycle that tells the events of the trojan war before achilles ' wrath ), when the achaeans desired to return home , they were restrained by achilles , who afterwards attacked the cattle of aeneas , sacked neighbouring cities ( like pedasus and lyrnessus , where the greeks capture the queen briseis ) and killed tenes , a son of apollo , as well as priam 's son troilus in the sanctuary of apollo thymbraios .
however , the romance between troilus and chryseis described in geoffrey chaucer 's " troilus and criseyde " and in william shakespeare 's " troilus and cressida " is a medieval invention .
in dares phrygius ' " account of the destruction of troy ", the latin summary through which the story of achilles was transmitted to medieval europe , as well as in older accounts , troilus was a young trojan prince , the youngest of king priam 's and hecuba 's five legitimate sons ( or according other sources , another son of apollo ).
despite his youth , he was one of the main trojan war leaders , a " horse fighter " or " chariot fighter " according to homer .
prophecies linked troilus ' fate to that of troy and so he was ambushed in an attempt to capture him .
yet achilles , struck by the beauty of both troilus and his sister polyxena , and overcome with lust , directed his sexual attentions on the youth who , refusing to yield , instead found himself decapitated upon an altar-omphalos of apollo thymbraios .
later versions of the story suggested troilus was accidentally killed by achilles in an over-ardent lovers ' embrace .
in this version of the myth , achilles ' death therefore came in retribution for this sacrilege .
ancient writers treated troilus as the epitome of a dead child mourned by his parents .
had troilus lived to adulthood , the first vatican mythographer claimed , troy would have been invincible .
homer 's " iliad " is the most famous narrative of achilles ' deeds in the trojan war .
achilles ' wrath ( , " mnis achills ") is the central theme of the poem .
the first two lines of the " iliad " read : the homeric epic only covers a few weeks of the decade-long war , and does not narrate achilles ' death .
it begins with achilles ' withdrawal from battle after being dishonoured by agamemnon , the commander of the achaean forces .
agamemnon has taken a woman named chryseis as his slave .
her father chryses , a priest of apollo , begs agamemnon to return her to him .
agamemnon refuses , and apollo sends a plague amongst the greeks .
the prophet calchas correctly determines the source of the troubles but will not speak unless achilles vows to protect him .
achilles does so , and calchas declares that chryseis must be returned to her father .
agamemnon consents , but then commands that achilles ' battle prize briseis , the daughter of briseus , be brought to him to replace chryseis .
angry at the dishonour of having his plunder and glory taken away ( and , as he says later , because he loves briseis ), with the urging of his mother thetis , achilles refuses to fight or lead his troops alongside the other greek forces .
at the same time , burning with rage over agamemnon 's theft , achilles prays to thetis to convince zeus to help the trojans gain ground in the war , so that he may regain his honour .
as the battle turns against the greeks , thanks to the influence of zeus , nestor declares that the trojans are winning because agamemnon has angered achilles , and urges the king to appease the warrior .
agamemnon agrees and sends odysseus and two other chieftains , ajax and phoenix , to achilles with the offer of the return of briseis and other gifts .
achilles rejects all agamemnon offers him and simply urges the greeks to sail home as he was planning to do .
the trojans , led by hector , subsequently push the greek army back toward the beaches and assault the greek ships .
with the greek forces on the verge of absolute destruction , patroclus leads the myrmidons into battle , wearing achilles ' armour , though achilles remains at his camp .
patroclus succeeds in pushing the trojans back from the beaches , but is killed by hector before he can lead a proper assault on the city of troy .
after receiving the news of the death of patroclus from antilochus , the son of nestor , achilles grieves over his beloved companion 's death .
his mother thetis comes to comfort the distraught achilles .
she persuades hephaestus to make new armour for him , in place of the armour that patroclus had been wearing , which was taken by hector .
the new armour includes the shield of achilles , described in great detail in the poem .
enraged over the death of patroclus , achilles ends his refusal to fight and takes the field , killing many men in his rage but always seeking out hector .
achilles even engages in battle with the river god scamander , who has become angry that achilles is choking his waters with all the men he has killed .
the god tries to drown achilles but is stopped by hera and hephaestus .
zeus himself takes note of achilles ' rage and sends the gods to restrain him so that he will not go on to sack troy itself before the time allotted for its destruction , seeming to show that the unhindered rage of achilles can defy fate itself .
finally , achilles finds his prey .
achilles chases hector around the wall of troy three times before athena , in the form of hector 's favorite and dearest brother , deiphobus , persuades hector to stop running and fight achilles face to face .
after hector realizes the trick , he knows the battle is inevitable .
wanting to go down fighting , he charges at achilles with his only weapon , his sword , but misses .
accepting his fate , hector begs achilles , not to spare his life , but to treat his body with respect after killing him .
achilles tells hector it is hopeless to expect that of him , declaring that " my rage , my fury would drive me now to hack your flesh away and eat you raw such agonies you have caused me ".
achilles then kills hector and drags his corpse by its heels behind his chariot .
after having a dream where patroclus begs achilles to hold his funeral , achilles hosts a series of funeral games in his honour .
with the assistance of the god hermes , hector 's father , priam , goes to achilles ' tent to plead with achilles for the return of hector 's body so that he can be buried .
achilles relents and promises a truce for the duration of the funeral .
the poem ends with a description of hector 's funeral , with the doom of troy and achilles himself still to come .
the " aethiopis " ( 7th century bc ) and a work named " posthomerica ", composed by quintus of smyrna in the fourth century ad , relate further events from the trojan war .
when penthesilea , queen of the amazons and daughter of ares , arrives in troy , priam hopes that she defeat achilles .
after his temporary truce with priam , achilles fights and kills the warrior queen , only to grieve over her death later .
at first , he was so distracted by her beauty , he did not fight as intensely as usual .
once he realized that his distraction was endangering his life , he refocused and killed her .
following the death of patroclus , nestor 's son antilochus becomes achilles ' closest companion .
when memnon , son of the dawn goddess eos and king of ethiopia , slays antilochus , achilles once more obtains revenge on the battlefield , killing memnon .
consequently , eos will not let the sun rise , until zeus persuades her .
the fight between achilles and memnon over antilochus echoes that of achilles and hector over patroclus , except that memnon ( unlike hector ) was also the son of a goddess .
many homeric scholars argued that episode inspired many details in the " iliad "' s description of the death of patroclus and achilles ' reaction to it .
the episode then formed the basis of the cyclic epic " aethiopis ", which was composed after the " iliad ", possibly in the 7th century bc .
the " aethiopis " is now lost , except for scattered fragments quoted by later authors .
the death of achilles , as predicted by hector with his dying breath , was brought about by paris with an arrow ( to the heel according to statius ).
in some versions , the god apollo guided paris ' arrow .
some retellings also state that achilles was scaling the gates of troy and was hit with a poisoned arrow .
all of these versions deny paris any sort of valour , owing to the common conception that paris was a coward and not the man his brother hector was , and achilles remained undefeated on the battlefield .
his bones were mingled with those of patroclus , and funeral games were held .
he was represented in the " aethiopis " as living after his death in the island of leuke at the mouth of the river danube .
another version of achilles ' death is that he fell deeply in love with one of the trojan princesses , polyxena .
achilles asks priam for polyxena 's hand in marriage .
priam is willing because it would mean the end of the war and an alliance with the world 's greatest warrior .
but while priam is overseeing the private marriage of polyxena and achilles , paris , who would have to give up helen if achilles married his sister , hides in the bushes and shoots achilles with a divine arrow , killing him .
in the " odyssey ", agamemnon informs achilles of his pompous burial and the erection of his mound at the hellespont while they are receiving the dead suitors in hades .
he claims they built a massive burial mound on the beach of ilion that could be seen by anyone approaching from the ocean .
achilles was cremated and his ashes buried in the same urn as those of patroclus .
paris was later killed by philoctetes using the enormous bow of heracles .
in book 10 of homer 's " odyssey ", odysseus sails to the underworld and converses with the shades .
one of these is achilles , who when greeted as " blessed in life , blessed in death ", responds that he would rather be a slave to the worst of masters than be king of all the dead .
but achilles then asks odysseus of his son 's exploits in the trojan war , and when odysseus tells of neoptolemus ' heroic actions , achilles is filled with satisfaction .
this leaves the reader with an ambiguous understanding of how achilles felt about the heroic life .
according to some accounts , he had married medea in life , so that after both their deaths they were united in the elysian fields of hades as hera promised thetis in apollonius ' " argonautica " ( 3rd century bc ).
the exact nature of achilles ' relationship with patroclus has been a subject of dispute in both the classical period and modern times .
in the " iliad ", it appears to be the model of a deep and loyal friendship .
homer does not suggest that achilles and his close friend patroclus were lovers .
despite there being no direct evidence in the text of the iliad that achilles and patroclus were lovers , this theory was expressed by some later authors .
commentators from classical antiquity to the present have often interpreted the relationship through the lens of their own cultures .
in 5th-century bc athens , the intense bond was often viewed in light of the greek custom of " paiderasteia ".
in plato 's " symposium ", the participants in a dialogue about love assume that achilles and patroclus were a couple ; phaedrus argues that achilles was the younger and more beautiful one so he was the beloved and patroclus was the lover .
but ancient greek had no words to distinguish heterosexual and homosexual , and it was assumed that a man could both desire handsome young men and have sex with women .
achilles ' armour was the object of a feud between odysseus and telamonian ajax ( ajax the greater ).
they competed for it by giving speeches on why they were the bravest after achilles to their trojan prisoners , who after considering both men came to a consensus in favor of odysseus .
furious , ajax cursed odysseus , which earned the ire of athena .
athena temporarily made ajax so mad with grief and anguish that he began killing sheep , thinking them his comrades .
after a while , when athena lifted his madness and ajax realized that he had actually been killing sheep , ajax was left so ashamed that he committed suicide .
odysseus eventually gave the armour to neoptolemus , the son of achilles .
a relic claimed to be achilles ' bronze-headed spear was for centuries preserved in the temple of athena on the acropolis of phaselis , lycia , a port on the pamphylian gulf .
the city was visited in 300 bc by alexander the great , who envisioned himself as the new achilles and carried the " iliad " with him , but his court biographers do not mention the spear .
however , it was shown in the time of pausanias in the 2nd century ad .
numerous paintings on pottery have suggested a tale not mentioned in the literary traditions .
at some point in the war , achilles and ajax were playing a board game (" petteia ").
they were absorbed in the game and oblivious to the surrounding battle .
the trojans attacked and reached the heroes , who were saved only by an intervention of athena .
the tomb of achilles , extant throughout antiquity in troad , was venerated by thessalians , but also by persian expeditionary forces , as well as by alexander the great and the roman emperor caracalla .
achilles ' cult was also to be found at other places , e . g . on the island of astypalaea in the sporades , in sparta which had a sanctuary , in elis and in achill 's homeland thessaly , as well as in the magna graecia cities of tarentum , locri and croton , accounting for an almost panhellenic cult to the hero .
the spread and intensity of the hero 's veneration among the greeks that had settled on the northern coast of the pontus euxinus , today 's black sea , appears to have been remarkable .
an archaic cult is attested for the milesian colony of olbia as well as for an island in the middle of the black sea , today identified with snake island ( ukrainian , " zmiinyi ", near kiliya , ukraine ).
early dedicatory inscriptions from the greek colonies on the black sea ( graffiti and inscribed clay disks , these possibly being votive offerings , from olbia , the area of berezan island and the tauric chersonese ) attest the existence of a heroic cult of achilles from the sixth century bc onwards .
the cult was still thriving in the third century ad , when dedicatory stelae from olbia refer to an " achilles pontrchs " (, roughly " lord of the sea ," or " of the pontus euxinus "), who was invoked as a protector of the city of olbia , venerated on par with olympian gods such as the local apollo prostates , hermes agoraeus , or poseidon .
pliny the elder ( 2000 ad ) in his " natural history " mentions a " port of the achi " and an " island of achilles ", famous for the tomb of that " man " ( portus achaeorum , insula achillis , tumulo eius viri clara ), situated somewhat nearby olbia and the dnieper-bug estuary ; furthermore , at 100roman miles from this island , he places a peninsula " which stretches forth in the shape of a sword " obliquely , called " dromos achilleos " ( , " achills drmos " " the race-course of achilles ") and considered the place of the hero 's exercise or of games instituted by him .
this last feature of pliny 's account is considered to be the iconic spit , called today " tendra " ( or " kosa tendra " and " kosa djarilgatch "), situated between the mouth of the dnieper and karkinit bay , but which is hardly 100roman miles ( c . 100km ) away from the dnieper-bug estuary , as pliny states .
( to the " race-course " he gives a length of 80miles , c . 100km , whereas the spit measures c . 70km today .)
in the following chapter of his book , pliny refers to the same island as " achillea " and introduces two further names for it : " leuce " or " macaron " ( from greek [] " island of the blest ").
the " present day " measures , he gives at this point , seem to account for an identification of " achillea " or " leuce " with today 's snake island .
pliny 's contemporary pomponius mela ( c . 40 ad ) tells that achilles was buried on an island named " achillea ", situated between the borysthenes and the ister , adding to the geographical confusion .
ruins of a square temple , measuring 30 meters to a side , possibly that dedicated to achilles , were discovered by captain kritzikly in 1000 on snake island .
a second exploration in 1000 showed that the construction of a lighthouse had destroyed all traces of this temple .
a fifth century bc black-glazed lekythos inscription , found on the island in 1000 , reads : " glaukos , son of poseidon , dedicated me to achilles , lord of leuke ."
in another inscription from the fifth or fourth century bc , a statue is dedicated to achilles , lord of leuke , by a citizen of olbia , while in a further dedication , the city of olbia confirms its continuous maintenance of the island 's cult , again suggesting its quality as a place of a supra-regional hero veneration .
the heroic cult dedicated to achilles on " leuce " seems to go back to an account from the lost epic " aethiopis " according to which , after his untimely death , thetis had snatched her son from the funeral pyre and removed him to a mythical (" lek nsos " " white island ").
already in the fifth century bc , pindar had mentioned a cult of achilles on a " bright island " ( , " phaenn nsos ") of the black sea , while in another of his works , pindar would retell the story of the immortalized achilles living on a geographically indefinite island of the blest together with other heroes such as his father peleus and cadmus .
well known is the connection of these mythological fortunate isles ( , " makrn nsoi ") or the homeric elysium with the stream oceanus which according to greek mythology surrounds the inhabited world , which should have accounted for the identification of the northern strands of the euxine with it .
guy hedreen has found further evidence for this connection of achilles with the northern margin of the inhabited world in a poem by alcaeus , speaking of " achilles lord of scythia " and the opposition of north and south , as evoked by achilles ' fight against the aethiopian prince memnon , who in his turn would be removed to his homeland by his mother eos after his death .
the " periplus of the euxine sea " ( c . 100 ad ) gives the following details :
the greek geographer dionysius periegetes , who lived probably during the first century ad , wrote that the island was called " leuce " " because the wild animals which live there are white .
it is said that there , in leuce island , reside the souls of achilles and other heroes , and that they wander through the uninhabited valleys of this island ; this is how jove rewarded the men who had distinguished themselves through their virtues , because through virtue they had acquired everlasting honour ".
similarly , others relate the island 's name to its white cliffs , snakes or birds dwelling there .
pausanias has been told that the island is " covered with forests and full of animals , some wild , some tame .
in this island there is also achilles ' temple and his statue ".
leuce had also a reputation as a place of healing .
pausanias reports that the delphic pythia sent a lord of croton to be cured of a chest wound .
ammianus marcellinus attributes the healing to waters (" aquae ") on the island .
a number of important commercial port cities of the greek waters were dedicated to achilles .
herodotus , pliny the elder and strabo reported on the existence of a town " achlleion " (), built by settlers from mytilene in the sixth century bc , close to the hero 's presumed burial mound in the troad .
later attestations point to an " achlleion " in messenia ( according to stephanus byzantinus ) and an " achlleios " () in laconia .
nicolae densuianu recognized a connection to achilles in the names of aquileia and of the northern arm of the danube delta , called chilia ( presumably from an older " achileii "), though his conclusion , that leuce had sovereign rights over the black sea , evokes modern rather than archaic sea-law .
the kings of epirus claimed to be descended from achilles through his son , neoptolemus .
alexander the great , son of the epirote princess olympias , could therefore also claim this descent , and in many ways strove to be like his great ancestor .
he is said to have visited the tomb of achilles at achilleion while passing troy .
in ad 200 the roman emperor caracalla , while on his way to war against parthia , emulated alexander by holding games around achilles ' tumulus .
the greek tragedian aeschylus wrote a trilogy of plays about achilles , given the title " achilleis " by modern scholars .
the tragedies relate the deeds of achilles during the trojan war , including his defeat of hector and eventual death when an arrow shot by paris and guided by apollo punctures his heel .
extant fragments of the " achilleis " and other aeschylean fragments have been assembled to produce a workable modern play .
the first part of the " achilleis " trilogy , " the myrmidons ", focused on the relationship between achilles and chorus , who represent the achaean army and try to convince achilles to give up his quarrel with agamemnon ; only a few lines survive today .
in plato 's " symposium ", phaedrus points out that aeschylus portrayed achilles as the lover and patroclus as the beloved ; phaedrus argues that this is incorrect because achilles , being the younger and more beautiful of the two , was the beloved , who loved his lover so much that he chose to die to revenge him .
the tragedian sophocles also wrote " the lovers of achilles ", a play with achilles as the main character .
only a few fragments survive .
towards the end of the 5th century bc , a more negative view of achilles emerges in greek drama ; euripides refers to achilles in a bitter or ironic tone in " hecuba ", " electra ", and " iphigenia in aulis ".
the philosopher zeno of elea centered one of his paradoxes on an imaginary footrace between " swift-footed " achilles and a tortoise , by which he attempted to show that achilles could not catch up to a tortoise with a head start , and therefore that motion and change were impossible .
as a student of the monist parmenides and a member of the eleatic school , zeno believed time and motion to be illusions .
the romans , who traditionally traced their lineage to troy , took a highly negative view of achilles .
virgil refers to achilles as a savage and a merciless butcher of men , while horace portrays achilles ruthlessly slaying women and children .
other writers , such as catullus , propertius , and ovid , represent a second strand of disparagement , with an emphasis on achilles ' erotic career .
this strand continues in latin accounts of the trojan war by writers such as dictys cretensis and dares phrygius and in benot de sainte-maure 's " roman de troie " and guido delle colonne 's " historia destructionis troiae ", which remained the most widely read and retold versions of the matter of troy until the 10th century .
achilles was described by the byzantine chronicler leo the deacon , not as hellene , but as scythian , while according to the byzantine author john malalas , his army was made up of a tribe previously known as myrmidons and later as bulgars .
achilles has been frequently the subject of operas , ballets and related genres .
in 1000 , elisabeth of bavaria , empress of austria , had a summer palace built in corfu .
the building is named the " achilleion ", after achilles .
its paintings and statuary depict scenes from the trojan war , with particular focus on achilles .
abraham lincoln
abraham lincoln (; february 10 , 1000 april 10 , 1000 ) was an american politician and lawyer who served as the 10th president of the united states from march 1000 until his assassination in april 1000 .
lincoln led the united states through its civil warits bloodiest war and perhaps its greatest moral , constitutional , and political crisis .
in doing so , he preserved the union , paved the way to the abolition of slavery , strengthened the federal government , and modernized the economy .
born in hodgenville , kentucky , lincoln grew up on the western frontier in kentucky and indiana .
largely self-educated , he became a lawyer in illinois , a whig party leader , and was elected to the illinois house of representatives , in which he served for eight years .
elected to the united states house of representatives in 1000 , lincoln promoted rapid modernization of the economy and opposed the mexicanamerican war .
after a single term , he returned to illinois and resumed his successful law practice .
reentering politics in 1000 , he became a leader in building the new republican party , which had a statewide majority in illinois .
in 1000 , while taking part in a series of highly publicized debates with his opponent and rival , democrat stephen a . douglas , lincoln spoke out against the expansion of slavery , but lost the u . s . senate race to douglas .
in 1000 , lincoln secured the republican party presidential nomination as a moderate from a swing state , though most delegates originally favored other candidates .
though he gained very little support in the slaveholding states of the south , he swept the north and was elected president in 1000 .
lincoln 's victory prompted seven southern slave states to form the confederate states of america before he moved into the white houseno compromise or reconciliation was found .
a confederate attack on fort sumter inspired the north to enthusiastically rally behind the union .
as the leader of the moderate faction of the republican party , lincoln confronted radical republicans , who demanded harsher treatment of the south , war democrats , who called for more compromise , anti-war democrats ( called copperheads ), who despised him , and irreconcilable secessionists , who plotted his assassination .
lincoln fought back by pitting his opponents against each other , by carefully planned political patronage , and by appealing to the american people with his powers of oratory .
his gettysburg address became an iconic endorsement of nationalism , republicanism , equal rights , liberty , and democracy .
lincoln concentrated on the military and political dimensions of the war in order to reunite the nation .
he suspended habeas corpus , leading to the controversial " ex parte merryman " decision , and he averted potential british intervention by defusing the " trent " affair .
lincoln closely supervised the war effort , especially the selection of generals , including his most successful general , ulysses s . grant .
he made major decisions on union war strategy , including a naval blockade that shut down the south 's trade .
as the war progressed , his complex moves toward ending slavery included the emancipation proclamation of 1000 ; lincoln used the u . s . army to protect escaped slaves , encouraged the border states to outlaw slavery , and pushed through congress the thirteenth amendment to the united states constitution , which permanently outlawed slavery .
an astute politician deeply involved with power issues in each state , lincoln reached out to the war democrats and managed his own re-election campaign in the 1000 presidential election .
anticipating the war 's conclusion , lincoln pushed a moderate view of reconstruction , seeking to reunite the nation speedily through a policy of generous reconciliation in the face of lingering and bitter divisiveness .
on april 10 , 1000 , five days after the surrender of confederate general robert e . lee , lincoln was assassinated by confederate sympathizer john wilkes booth and died the next day .
lincoln has been consistently ranked both by scholars and the public as among the greatest u . s . presidents .
abraham lincoln was born february 10 , 1000 , the second child of thomas and nancy hanks lincoln , in a one-room log cabin on the sinking spring farm near hodgenville , kentucky .
he was a descendant of samuel lincoln , an englishman who migrated from hingham , norfolk , to its namesake of hingham , massachusetts , in 1000 .
samuel 's grandson and great-grandson began the family 's western migration , which passed through new jersey , pennsylvania , and virginia .
lincoln 's paternal grandfather and namesake , captain abraham lincoln , moved the family from virginia to jefferson county , kentucky , in the 1000s .
captain lincoln was killed in an indian raid in 1000 .
his children , including eight-year-old thomas , the future president 's father , witnessed the attack .
after his father 's murder , thomas was left to make his own way on the frontier , working at odd jobs in kentucky and in tennessee , before settling with members of his family in hardin county , kentucky , in the early 1000s .
lincoln 's mother , nancy , is widely assumed to have been the daughter of lucy hanks , although no record of nancy hanks ' birth has ever been found .
according to william ensign lincoln 's book " the ancestry of abraham lincoln ", nancy was the daughter of joseph hanks ; however , the debate continues over whether she was born out of wedlock .
still another researcher , adin baber , claims that nancy hanks was the daughter of abraham hanks and sarah harper of virginia .
thomas lincoln and nancy hanks were married on june 10 , 1000 , in washington county , and moved to elizabethtown , kentucky , following their marriage .
they became the parents of three children : sarah , born on february 10 , 1000 ; abraham , on february 10 , 1000 ; and another son , thomas , who died in infancy .
thomas lincoln bought or leased several farms in kentucky , including the sinking spring farm , where abraham was born ; however , a land title dispute soon forced the lincolns to move .
in 1000 , the family moved north , to knob creek farm , where thomas acquired title to of land .
in 1000 a claimant in another land dispute sought to eject the family from the farm .
of the that thomas held in kentucky , he lost all but of his land in court disputes over property titles .
frustrated over the lack of security provided by the kentucky title survey system in the courts , thomas sold the remaining land he held in kentucky in 1000 , and began planning a move to indiana , where the land survey process was more reliable and the ability for an individual to retain land titles was more secure .
in 1000 , the family moved north across the ohio river to indiana , a free , non-slaveholding territory , where they settled in an " unbroken forest " in hurricane township , perry county .
( their land in southern indiana became part of spencer county , indiana , when the county was established in 1000 .)
the farm is preserved as part of the lincoln boyhood national memorial .
in 1000 , lincoln noted that the family 's move to indiana was " partly on account of slavery "; but mainly due to land title difficulties in kentucky .
during the family 's years in kentucky and indiana , thomas lincoln worked as a farmer , cabinetmaker , and carpenter .
he owned farms , several town lots and livestock , paid taxes , sat on juries , appraised estates , served on country slave patrols , and guarded prisoners .
thomas and nancy lincoln were also members of a separate baptists church , which had restrictive moral standards and opposed alcohol , dancing , and slavery .
within a year of the family 's arrival in indiana , thomas claimed title to of indiana land .
despite some financial challenges he eventually obtained clear title to of land in what became known as the little pigeon creek community in spencer county .
prior to the family 's move to illinois in 1000 , thomas had acquired an additional twenty acres of land adjacent to his property .
several significant family events took place during lincoln 's youth in indiana .
on october 5 , 1000 , nancy lincoln died of milk sickness , leaving eleven-year-old sarah in charge of a household that included her father , nine-year-old abraham , and dennis hanks , nancy 's nineteen-year-old orphaned cousin .
on december 2 , 1000 , lincoln 's father married sarah " sally " bush johnston , a widow from elizabethtown , kentucky , with three children of her own .
abraham became very close to his stepmother , whom he referred to as " mother ".
those who knew lincoln as a teenager later recalled him being very distraught over his sister sarah 's death on january 20 , 1000 , while giving birth to a stillborn son .
as a youth , lincoln disliked the hard labor associated with frontier life .
some of his neighbors and family members thought for a time that he was lazy for all his " reading , scribbling , writing , ciphering , writing poetry , etc .
", and must have done it to avoid manual labor .
his stepmother also acknowledged he did not enjoy " physical labor ", but loved to read .
lincoln was largely self-educated .
his formal schooling from several itinerant teachers was intermittent , the aggregate of which may have amounted to less than a year ; however , he was an avid reader and retained a lifelong interest in learning .
family , neighbors , and schoolmates of lincoln 's youth recalled that he read and reread the " king james bible ", " aesop 's fables ", bunyan 's " the pilgrim 's progress ", defoe 's " robinson crusoe ", weems 's " the life of washington ", and franklin 's " autobiography ", among others .
as he grew into his teens , lincoln took responsibility for the chores expected of him as one of the boys in the household .
he also complied with the customary obligation of a son giving his father all earnings from work done outside the home until the age of twenty-one .
abraham became adept at using an axe .
tall for his age , lincoln was also strong and athletic .
he attained a reputation for brawn and audacity after a very competitive wrestling match with the renowned leader of a group of ruffians known as " the clary 's grove boys ".
in early march 1000 , partly out of fear of a milk sickness outbreak along the ohio river , several members of the extended lincoln family moved west to illinois , a non-slaveholding state , and settled in macon county , west of decatur .
historians disagree on who initiated the move ; thomas lincoln had no obvious reason to leave indiana , and one possibility is that other members of the family , including dennis hanks , might not have attained the stability and steady income that thomas lincoln had .
after the family relocated to illinois , abraham became increasingly distant from his father , in part because of his father 's lack of education , and occasionally lent him money .
in 1000 , as thomas and other members of the family prepared to move to a new homestead in coles county , illinois , abraham was old enough to make his own decisions and struck out on his own .
traveling down the sangamon river , he ended up in the village of new salem in sangamon county .
later that spring , denton offutt , a new salem merchant , hired lincoln and some friends to take goods by flatboat from new salem to new orleans via the sangamon , illinois , and mississippi rivers .
after arriving in new orleansand witnessing slavery firsthandlincoln returned to new salem , where he remained for the next six years .
according to some sources , lincoln 's first romantic interest was ann rutledge , whom he met when he first moved to new salem ; these sources indicate that by 1000 , they were in a relationship but not formally engaged .
she died at the age of 20 on august 20 , 1000 , most likely of typhoid fever .
in the early 1000s , he met mary owens from kentucky when she was visiting her sister .
late in 1000 , lincoln agreed to a match with mary if she returned to new salem .
mary did return in november 1000 , and lincoln courted her for a time ; however , they both had second thoughts about their relationship .
on august 10 , 1000 , lincoln wrote mary a letter suggesting he would not blame her if she ended the relationship .
she never replied and the courtship ended .
in 1000 , lincoln became engaged to mary todd , who was from a wealthy slave-holding family in lexington , kentucky .
they met in springfield , illinois , in december 1000 and were engaged the following december .
a wedding set for january 1 , 1000 , was canceled when the two broke off their engagement at lincoln 's initiative .
they later met again at a party and married on november 4 , 1000 , in the springfield mansion of mary 's married sister .
while preparing for the nuptials and feeling anxiety again , lincoln , when asked where he was going , replied , " to hell , i suppose ."
in 1000 , the couple bought a house in springfield near lincoln 's law office .
mary todd lincoln kept house , often with the help of a relative or hired servant girl .
he was an affectionate , though often absent , husband and father of four children .
robert todd lincoln was born in 1000 and edward baker lincoln ( eddie ) in 1000 .
edward died on february 1 , 1000 , in springfield , probably of tuberculosis .
" willie " lincoln was born on december 20 , 1000 , and died of a fever on february 20 , 1000 .
the lincolns ' fourth son , thomas " tad " lincoln , was born on april 4 , 1000 , and died of heart failure at the age of 10 on july 10 , 1000 .
robert was the only child to live to adulthood and have children .
the lincolns ' last descendant , great-grandson robert todd lincoln beckwith , died in 1000 .
lincoln " was remarkably fond of children ", and the lincolns were not considered to be strict with their own .
the deaths of their sons had profound effects on both parents .
later in life , mary struggled with the stresses of losing her husband and sons , and robert lincoln committed her temporarily to a mental health asylum in 1000 .
abraham lincoln suffered from " melancholy ", a condition which now is referred to as clinical depression .
lincoln 's father-in-law and others of the todd family were either slave owners or slave traders .
lincoln was close to the todds , and he and his family occasionally visited the todd estate in lexington .
during his term as president of the united states of america , mary was known to cook for lincoln often .
since she was raised by a wealthy family , her cooking abilities were simple , but satisfied lincoln 's tastes , which included , particularly , imported oysters .
in 1000 , at age 20 , lincoln and a partner bought a small general store on credit in new salem , illinois .
although the economy was booming in the region , the business struggled and lincoln eventually sold his share .
that march he began his political career with his first campaign for the illinois general assembly .
he had attained local popularity and could draw crowds as a natural raconteur in new salem , though he lacked an education , powerful friends , and money , which may be why he lost .
he advocated navigational improvements on the sangamon river .
before the election , lincoln served as a captain in the illinois militia during the black hawk war .
following his return , lincoln continued his campaign for the august 6 election for the illinois general assembly .
at , he was tall and " strong enough to intimidate any rival ".
at his first speech , when he saw a supporter in the crowd being attacked , lincoln grabbed the assailant by his " neck and the seat of his trousers " and threw him .
lincoln finished eighth out of 10 candidates ( the top four were elected ), though he received 200 of the 300 votes cast in the new salem precinct .
lincoln served as new salem 's postmaster and later as county surveyor , all the while reading voraciously .
he then decided to become a lawyer and began teaching himself law by reading blackstone 's " commentaries on the laws of england " and other law books .
of his learning method , lincoln stated : " i studied with nobody ".
his second campaign in 1000 was successful .
he won election to the state legislature ; though he ran as a whig , many democrats favored him over a more powerful whig opponent .
admitted to the illinois bar in 1000 , he moved to springfield , illinois , and began to practice law under john t . stuart , mary todd 's cousin .
lincoln became an able and successful lawyer with a reputation as a formidable adversary during cross-examinations and closing arguments .
he partnered with stephen t . logan from 1000 until 1000 .
then lincoln began his practice with william herndon , whom lincoln thought " a studious young man ".
successful on his second run for office , lincoln served four successive terms in the illinois house of representatives as a whig representative from sangamon county .
he supported the construction of the illinois and michigan canal , which he remained involved with later as a canal commissioner .
in the 100000 legislative session , he voted to expand suffrage to white males , whether landowners or not .
he was known for his " free soil " stance of opposing both slavery and abolitionism .
he first articulated this in 1000 , saying , "[ the ] institution of slavery is founded on both injustice and bad policy , but the promulgation of abolition doctrines tends rather to increase than abate its evils ."
his stance closely followed henry clay in supporting the american colonization society program of making the abolition of slavery practical by its advocation and helping the freed slaves to settle in liberia in africa .
from the early 1000s , lincoln was a steadfast whig and professed to friends in 1000 to be " an old line whig , a disciple of henry clay ".
the party , including lincoln , favored economic modernization in banking , protective tariffs to fund internal improvements including railroads , and espoused urbanization as well .
lincoln ran for the whig nomination for illinois 's 7th district of the u . s . house of representatives in 1000 , but was defeated by john j . hardin .
however , lincoln won support for the principle of rotation , whereby hardin would retire after only one term to allow for the nomination of another candidate .
lincoln hoped that this arrangement would lead to his nomination in 1000 .
lincoln was indeed elected to the house of representatives in 1000 , where he served one two-year term .
he was the only whig in the illinois delegation , but he showed his party loyalty by participating in almost all votes and making speeches that echoed the party line .
lincoln , in collaboration with abolitionist congressman joshua r . giddings , wrote a bill to abolish slavery in the district of columbia with compensation for the owners , enforcement to capture fugitive slaves , and a popular vote on the matter .
he abandoned the bill when it failed to garner sufficient whig supporters .
on foreign and military policy , lincoln spoke out against the mexicanamerican war , which he attributed to president polk 's desire for " military glorythat attractive rainbow , that rises in showers of blood ".
lincoln also supported the wilmot proviso , which , if it had been adopted , would have banned slavery in any u . s . territory won from mexico .
lincoln emphasized his opposition to polk by drafting and introducing his spot resolutions .
the war had begun with a mexican slaughter of american soldiers in territory disputed by mexico and the u . s . polk insisted that mexican soldiers had " invaded " our territory " and shed the blood of our fellow-citizens on our " own soil ".
lincoln demanded that polk show congress the exact spot on which blood had been shed and prove that the spot was on american soil .
congress never enacted the resolution or even debated it , the national papers ignored it , and it resulted in a loss of political support for lincoln in his district .
one illinois newspaper derisively nicknamed him " spotty lincoln ".
lincoln later regretted some of his statements , especially his attack on the presidential war-making powers .
realizing clay was unlikely to win the presidency , lincoln , who had pledged in 1000 to serve only one term in the house , supported general zachary taylor for the whig nomination in the 1000 presidential election .
taylor won and lincoln hoped to be appointed commissioner of the general land office , but that lucrative patronage job went to an illinois rival , justin butterfield , considered by the administration to be a highly skilled lawyer , but in lincoln 's view , an " old fossil ".
the administration offered him the consolation prize of secretary or governor of the oregon territory .
this distant territory was a democratic stronghold , and acceptance of the post would have effectively ended his legal and political career in illinois , so he declined and resumed his law practice .
lincoln returned to practicing law in springfield , handling " every kind of business that could come before a prairie lawyer ".
twice a year for 10 years , 10 weeks at a time , he appeared in county seats in the midstate region when the county courts were in session .
lincoln handled many transportation cases in the midst of the nation 's western expansion , particularly the conflicts arising from the operation of river barges under the many new railroad bridges .
as a riverboat man , lincoln initially favored those interests , but ultimately represented whoever hired him .
in fact , he later represented a bridge company against a riverboat company in a landmark case involving a canal boat that sank after hitting a bridge .
in 1000 , he received a patent for a flotation device for the movement of boats in shallow water .
the idea was never commercialized , but lincoln is the only president to hold a patent .
in 1000 , he represented the alton & sangamon railroad in a dispute with one of its shareholders , james a . barret , who had refused to pay the balance on his pledge to buy shares in the railroad on the grounds that the company had changed its original train route .
lincoln successfully argued that the railroad company was not bound by its original charter extant at the time of barret 's pledge ; the charter was amended in the public interest to provide a newer , superior , and less expensive route , and the corporation retained the right to demand barret 's payment .
the decision by the illinois supreme court has been cited by numerous other courts in the nation .
lincoln appeared before the illinois supreme court in 100 cases , in 50 as sole counsel , of which 30 were decided in his favor .
from 1000 to 1000 , another of lincoln 's largest clients was the illinois central railroad .
lincoln 's reputation with clients gave rise to his nickname " honest abe ."
lincoln 's most notable criminal trial occurred in 1000 when he defended william " duff " armstrong , who was on trial for the murder of james preston metzker .
the case is famous for lincoln 's use of a fact established by judicial notice in order to challenge the credibility of an eyewitness .
after an opposing witness testified seeing the crime in the moonlight , lincoln produced a " farmers ' almanac " showing the moon was at a low angle , drastically reducing visibility .
based on this evidence , armstrong was acquitted .
lincoln rarely raised objections in the courtroom ; but in an 1000 case , where he defended a cousin , peachy harrison , who was accused of stabbing another to death , lincoln angrily protested the judge 's decision to exclude evidence favorable to his client .
instead of holding lincoln in contempt of court as was expected , the judge , a democrat , reversed his ruling , allowing the evidence and acquitting harrison .
the debate over the status of slavery in the territories exacerbated sectional tensions between the slave-holding south and the north , and the compromise of 1000 failed to defuse the issue .
in the early 1000s , lincoln supported efforts for sectional mediation , and his 1000 eulogy for henry clay focused on the latter 's support for gradual emancipation and opposition to " both extremes " on the slavery issue .
as the 1000s progressed , the debate over slavery in the nebraska territory and kansas territory became particularly acrimonious , and senator stephen a . douglas of illinois proposed popular sovereignty as a compromise measure ; the proposal would take the issue of slavery out of the hands of congress by allowing the people of each territory to decide the status of slavery themselves .
the proposal alarmed many northerners , who hoped to stop the spread of slavery into the territories .
despite this northern opposition , douglas 's kansas-nebraska act narrowly passed congress in may 1000 .
for months after its passage , lincoln did not publicly comment on the kansas-nebraska act , but he came to strongly oppose it .
on october 10 , 1000 , in his " peoria speech ", lincoln declared his opposition to slavery , which he repeated en route to the presidency .
speaking in his kentucky accent , with a very powerful voice , he said the kansas act had a "" declared " indifference , but as i must think , a covert " real " zeal for the spread of slavery .
i cannot but hate it .
i hate it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself .
i hate it because it deprives our republican example of its just influence in the world ..." lincoln 's attacks on the kansas-nebraska act marked his return to political life .
nationally , the whigs were irreparably split by the kansasnebraska act and other efforts to compromise on the slavery issue .
reflecting the demise of his party , lincoln would write in 1000 , " i think i am a whig , but others say there are no whigs , and that i am an abolitionist [...] i do no more than oppose the " extension " of slavery ."
drawing on the antislavery portion of the whig party , and combining free soil , liberty , and antislavery democratic party members , the new republican party formed as a northern party dedicated to antislavery .
lincoln resisted early attempts to recruit him to the new party , fearing that it would serve as a platform for extreme abolitionists .
lincoln also still hoped to rejuvenate the ailing whig party , though he bemoaned his party 's growing closeness with the nativist know nothing movement .
lincoln was elected to the illinois legislature as whig .
in the aftermath of the 1000 elections , which showed the power and popularity of the movement opposed to the kansas-nebraska act , lincoln declined to take his seat and instead sought election to the united states senate .
at that time , senators were elected by the state legislature .
after leading in the first six rounds of voting , but unable to obtain a majority , lincoln instructed his backers to vote for lyman trumbull .
trumbull was an antislavery democrat , and had received few votes in the earlier ballots ; his supporters , also antislavery democrats , had vowed not to support any whig .
lincoln 's decision to withdraw enabled his whig supporters and trumbull 's antislavery democrats to combine and defeat the mainstream democratic candidate , joel aldrich matteson .
in part due to the ongoing violent political confrontations in the kansas , opposition to the kansas-nebraska act remained strong in illinois and throughout the north .
as the 1000 elections approached , lincoln abandoned the defunct whig party in favor of the republicans .
he attended the may 1000 bloomington convention , which formally established the illinois republican party .
the convention platform asserted that congress had the right to regulate slavery in the territories and called for the immediate admission of kansas as a free state .
lincoln gave the final speech of the convention , in which he endorsed the party platform and called for the preservation of the union .
at the june 1000 republican national convention , lincoln received significant support on the vice presidential ballot , though the party nominated a ticket of john c . frmont and william dayton .
lincoln strongly supported the republican ticket , campaigning for the party throughout illinois .
the democrats nominated former ambassador james buchanan , who had been out of the country since 1000 and thus had avoided the debate over slavery in the territories , while the know nothings nominated former whig president millard fillmore .
in the 1000 elections , buchanan defeated both his challengers , but frmont won several northern states and republican william henry bissell won election as governor of illinois .
though lincoln did not himself win office , his vigorous campaigning had made him the leading republican in illinois .
eric foner ( 2000 ) contrasts the abolitionists and anti-slavery radical republicans of the northeast who saw slavery as a sin , with the conservative republicans who thought it was bad because it hurt white people and blocked progress .
foner argues that lincoln was a moderate in the middle , opposing slavery primarily because it violated the republicanism principles of the founding fathers , especially the equality of all men and democratic self-government as expressed in the declaration of independence .
in march 1000 , the supreme court issued its decision in " dred scott v . sandford "; chief justice roger b . taney opined that blacks were not citizens , and derived no rights from the constitution .
while many democrats hoped that " dred scott " would end the dispute over slavery in the territories , the decision sparked further outrage in the north .
lincoln denounced the decision , alleging it was the product of a conspiracy of democrats to support the slave power .
lincoln argued , " the authors of the declaration of independence never intended ' to say all were equal in color , size , intellect , moral developments , or social capacity ', but they ' did consider all men created equalequal in certain inalienable rights , among which are life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness '."
douglas was up for re-election in 1000 , and lincoln hoped to defeat the powerful illinois democrat .
with the former democrat trumbull now serving as a republican senator , many in the party felt that a former whig should be nominated in 1000 , and lincoln 's 1000 campaigning and willingness to support trumbull in 1000 had earned him favor in the party .
some eastern republicans favored the reelection of douglas for the senate in 1000 , since he had led the opposition to the lecompton constitution , which would have admitted kansas as a slave state .
but many illinois republicans resented this eastern interference .
for the first time , illinois republicans held a convention to agree upon a senate candidate , and lincoln won the party 's senate nomination with little opposition .
accepting the nomination , lincoln delivered his house divided speech , drawing on , " a house divided against itself cannot stand .
i believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free .
i do not expect the union to be dissolvedi do not expect the house to fallbut i do expect it will cease to be divided .
it will become all one thing , or all the other ."
the speech created an evocative image of the danger of disunion caused by the slavery debate , and rallied republicans across the north .
the stage was then set for the campaign for statewide election of the illinois legislature which would , in turn , select lincoln or douglas as its u . s . senator .
on being informed of lincoln 's nomination , douglas stated "[ lincoln ] is the strong man of the party ... and if i beat him , my victory will be hardly won ."
the senate campaign featured the seven lincolndouglas debates of 1000 , the most famous political debates in american history .
the principals stood in stark contrast both physically and politically .
lincoln warned that " the slave power " was threatening the values of republicanism , and accused douglas of distorting the values of the founding fathers that all men are created equal , while douglas emphasized his freeport doctrine , that local settlers were free to choose whether to allow slavery or not , and accused lincoln of having joined the abolitionists .
the debates had an atmosphere of a prize fight and drew crowds in the thousands .
lincoln stated douglas ' popular sovereignty theory was a threat to the nation 's morality and that douglas represented a conspiracy to extend slavery to free states .
douglas said that lincoln was defying the authority of the u . s . supreme court and the " dred scott " decision .
though the republican legislative candidates won more popular votes , the democrats won more seats , and the legislature re-elected douglas to the senate .
despite the bitterness of the defeat for lincoln , his articulation of the issues gave him a national political reputation .
in may 1000 , lincoln purchased the " illinois staats-anzeiger ", a german-language newspaper which was consistently supportive ; most of the state 's 100 , 000 german americans voted democratic but there was republican support that a german-language paper could mobilize .
in the aftermath of the 1000 election , newspapers frequently mentioned lincoln as a potential republican presidential candidate in 1000 , with william h . seward , salmon p . chase , edward bates , and simon cameron looming as rivals for the nomination .
while lincoln was popular in the midwest , he lacked support in the northeast , and was unsure as to whether he should seek the presidency .
in january 1000 , lincoln told a group of political allies that he would accept the 1000 presidential nomination if offered , and in the following months several local papers endorsed lincoln for president .
on february 20 , 1000 , new york party leaders invited lincoln to give a speech at cooper union to a group of powerful republicans .
lincoln argued that the founding fathers had little use for popular sovereignty and had repeatedly sought to restrict slavery .
lincoln insisted the moral foundation of the republicans required opposition to slavery , and rejected any " groping for some middle ground between the right and the wrong ".
despite his inelegant appearancemany in the audience thought him awkward and even uglylincoln demonstrated an intellectual leadership that brought him into the front ranks of the party and into contention for the republican presidential nomination .
journalist noah brooks reported , " no man ever before made such an impression on his first appeal to a new york audience ."
historian donald described the speech as a " superb political move for an unannounced candidate , to appear in one rival 's ( seward ) own state at an event sponsored by the second rival 's ( chase ) loyalists , while not mentioning either by name during its delivery ".
in response to an inquiry about his presidential intentions , lincoln said , " the taste " is " in my mouth a little ."
on may 900 , 1000 , the illinois republican state convention was held in decatur .
lincoln 's followers organized a campaign team led by david davis , norman judd , leonard swett , and jesse dubois , and lincoln received his first endorsement to run for the presidency .
exploiting the embellished legend of his frontier days with his father ( clearing the land and splitting fence rails with an ax ), lincoln 's supporters adopted the label of " the rail candidate ".
in 1000 lincoln described himself : " i am in height , six feet , four inches , nearly ; lean in flesh , weighing , on an average , one hundred and eighty pounds ; dark complexion , with coarse black hair , and gray eyes ."
a biographer added that he had a :
on may 10 , at the republican national convention in chicago , lincoln 's friends promised and manipulated and won the nomination on the third ballot , beating candidates such as seward and chase .
a former democrat , hannibal hamlin of maine , was nominated for vice president to balance the ticket .
lincoln 's success depended on his reputation as a moderate on the slavery issue , and his strong support for whiggish programs of internal improvements and the protective tariff .
on the third ballot pennsylvania put him over the top .
pennsylvania iron interests were reassured by his support for protective tariffs .
lincoln 's managers had been adroitly focused on this delegation as well as the others , while following lincoln 's strong dictate to " make no contracts that bind me ".
most republicans agreed with lincoln that the north was the aggrieved party , as the slave power tightened its grasp on the national government with the " dred scott " decision and the presidency of james buchanan .
throughout the 1000s , lincoln doubted the prospects of civil war , and his supporters rejected claims that his election would incite secession .
meanwhile , douglas was selected as the candidate of the northern democrats .
delegates from 10 slave states walked out of the democratic convention , disagreeing with douglas ' position on popular sovereignty , and ultimately selected incumbent vice president john c . breckinridge as their candidate .
a group of former whigs and know nothings formed the constitutional union party and nominated john bell of tennessee .
lincoln and douglas would compete for votes in the north , while bell and breckinridge primarily found support in the south .
prior to the republican convention , the lincoln campaign began cultivating a nationwide teen and young adult organization , the wide awakes , which it used to generate popular support for lincoln throughout the country to spearhead large voter registration drives , knowing that new voters and young voters tend to embrace new and young parties .
as lincoln 's ideas of abolishing slavery grew , so did his supporters .
people of the northern states knew the southern states would vote against lincoln because of his ideas of anti-slavery and took action to rally supporters for lincoln .
as douglas and the other candidates went through with their campaigns , lincoln was the only one of them who gave no speeches .
instead , he monitored the campaign closely and relied on the enthusiasm of the republican party .
the party did the leg work that produced majorities across the north , and produced an abundance of campaign posters , leaflets , and newspaper editorials .
there were thousands of republican speakers who focused first on the party platform , and second on lincoln 's life story , emphasizing his childhood poverty .
the goal was to demonstrate the superior power of " free labor ", whereby a common farm boy could work his way to the top by his own efforts .
the republican party 's production of campaign literature dwarfed the combined opposition ; a " chicago tribune " writer produced a pamphlet that detailed lincoln 's life , and sold 100 , 000 to 200 , 000 copies .
on november 6 , 1000 , lincoln was elected the 10th president of the united states , beating douglas , breckinridge , and bell .
he was the first president from the republican party .
his victory was entirely due to the strength of his support in the north and west ; no ballots were cast for him in 10 of the 10 southern slave states , and he won only two of 900 counties in all the southern states .
lincoln received 1 , 800 , 400 votes , douglas 1 , 300 , 900 votes , breckinridge 800 , 700 votes , and bell 500 , 700 votes .
turnout was 80 . 2percent , with lincoln winning the free northern states , as well as california and oregon .
douglas won missouri , and split new jersey with lincoln .
bell won virginia , tennessee , and kentucky , and breckinridge won the rest of the south .
although lincoln won only a plurality of the popular vote , his victory in the electoral college was decisive : lincoln had 100 and his opponents added together had only 100 .
there were fusion tickets in which all of lincoln 's opponents combined to support the same slate of electors in new york , new jersey , and rhode island , but even if the anti-lincoln vote had been combined in every state , lincoln still would have won a majority in the electoral college .
as lincoln 's election became evident , secessionists made clear their intent to leave the union before he took office the next march .
on december 20 , 1000 , south carolina took the lead by adopting an ordinance of secession ; by february 1 , 1000 , florida , mississippi , alabama , georgia , louisiana , and texas followed .
six of these states then adopted a constitution and declared themselves to be a sovereign nation , the confederate states of america .
the upper south and border states ( delaware , maryland , virginia , north carolina , tennessee , kentucky , missouri , and arkansas ) listened to , but initially rejected , the secessionist appeal .
president buchanan and president-elect lincoln refused to recognize the confederacy , declaring secession illegal .
the confederacy selected jefferson davis as its provisional president on february 9 , 1000 .
there were attempts at compromise .
the crittenden compromise would have extended the missouri compromise line of 1000 , dividing the territories into slave and free , contrary to the republican party 's free-soil platform .
lincoln rejected the idea , saying , " i will suffer death before i consent ... to any concession or compromise which looks like buying the privilege to take possession of this government to which we have a constitutional right ."
lincoln , however , did tacitly support the proposed corwin amendment to the constitution , which passed congress before lincoln came into office and was then awaiting ratification by the states .
that proposed amendment would have protected slavery in states where it already existed and would have guaranteed that congress would not interfere with slavery without southern consent .
a few weeks before the war , lincoln sent a letter to every governor informing them congress had passed a joint resolution to amend the constitution .
lincoln was open to the possibility of a constitutional convention to make further amendments to the constitution .
en route to his inauguration by train , lincoln addressed crowds and legislatures across the north .
the president-elect then evaded possible assassins in baltimore , who were uncovered by lincoln 's head of security , allan pinkerton .
on february 20 , 1000 , he arrived in disguise in washington , d . c ., which was placed under substantial military guard .
lincoln directed his inaugural address to the south , proclaiming once again that he had no intention , or inclination , to abolish slavery in the southern states :
the president ended his address with an appeal to the people of the south : " we are not enemies , but friends .
we must not be enemies ...
the mystic chords of memory , stretching from every battlefield , and patriot grave , to every living heart and hearthstone , all over this broad land , will yet swell the chorus of the union , when again touched , as surely they will be , by the better angels of our nature ."
the failure of the peace conference of 1000 signaled that legislative compromise was impossible .
by march 1000 , no leaders of the insurrection had proposed rejoining the union on any terms .
meanwhile , lincoln and the republican leadership agreed that the dismantling of the union could not be tolerated .
lincoln said as the war was ending :
the commander of fort sumter , south carolina , major robert anderson , sent a request for provisions to washington , and the execution of lincoln 's order to meet that request was seen by the secessionists as an act of war .
on april 10 , 1000 , confederate forces fired on union troops at fort sumter , forcing them to surrender , and began the war .
historian allan nevins argued that the newly inaugurated lincoln made three miscalculations : underestimating the gravity of the crisis , exaggerating the strength of unionist sentiment in the south , and not realizing the southern unionists were insisting there be no invasion .
william tecumseh sherman talked to lincoln during inauguration week and was " sadly disappointed " at his failure to realize that " the country was sleeping on a volcano " and that the south was preparing for war .
historian donald concludes that , " his repeated efforts to avoid collision in the months between inauguration and the firing on ft . sumter showed he adhered to his vow not to be the first to shed fraternal blood .
but he also vowed not to surrender the forts .
the only resolution of these contradictory positions was for the confederates to fire the first shot ; they did just that ."
on april 10 , lincoln called on all the states to send detachments totaling 70 , 000 troops to recapture forts , protect washington , and " preserve the union ", which , in his view , still existed intact despite the actions of the seceding states .
this call forced the states to choose sides .
virginia declared its secession and was rewarded with the confederate capital , despite the exposed position of richmond so close to union lines .
north carolina , tennessee , and arkansas also voted for secession over the next two months .
secession sentiment was strong in missouri and maryland , but did not prevail ; kentucky tried to be neutral .
the confederate attack on fort sumter rallied americans north of the mason-dixon line to the defense of the american nation .
historian allan nevins says :
states sent union regiments south in response to lincoln 's call to save the capital and confront the rebellion .
on april 10 , mobs in baltimore , which controlled the rail links , attacked union troops who were changing trains , and local leaders ' groups later burned critical rail bridges to the capital .
the army responded by arresting local maryland officials .
lincoln suspended the writ of " habeas corpus " in areas the army felt it needed to secure for troops to reach washington .
john merryman , a maryland official involved in hindering the u . s . troop movements , petitioned supreme court chief justice and marylander , roger b . taney , author of the controversial pro-slavery " dred scott " opinion , to issue a writ of " habeas corpus ", and in june taney , acting as a circuit judge and not speaking for the supreme court , issued the writ , because in his opinion only congress could suspend the writ .
lincoln continued the army policy that the writ was suspended in limited areas despite the ex parte merryman ruling .
after the battle of fort sumter , lincoln realized the importance of taking immediate executive control of the war and making an overall strategy to put down the rebellion .
lincoln encountered an unprecedented political and military crisis , and he responded as commander-in-chief , using unprecedented powers .
he expanded his war powers , and imposed a blockade on all the confederate shipping ports , disbursed funds before appropriation by congress , and after suspending " habeas corpus ", arrested and imprisoned thousands of suspected confederate sympathizers .
lincoln was supported by congress and the northern public for these actions .
in addition , lincoln had to contend with reinforcing strong union sympathies in the border slave states and keeping the war from becoming an international conflict .
the war effort was the source of continued disparagement of lincoln , and dominated his time and attention .
from the start , it was clear that bipartisan support would be essential to success in the war effort , and any manner of compromise alienated factions on both sides of the aisle , such as the appointment of republicans and democrats to command positions in the union army .
copperheads criticized lincoln for refusing to compromise on the slavery issue .
conversely , the radical republicans criticized him for moving too slowly in abolishing slavery .
on august 6 , 1000 , lincoln signed the confiscation act that authorized judiciary proceedings to confiscate and free slaves who were used to support the confederate war effort .
in practice , the law had little effect , but it did signal political support for abolishing slavery in the confederacy .
in late august 1000 , general john c . frmont , the 1000 republican presidential nominee , issued , without consulting his superiors in washington , a proclamation of martial law in missouri .
he declared that any citizen found bearing arms could be court-martialed and shot , and that slaves of persons aiding the rebellion would be freed .
frmont was already under a cloud with charges of negligence in his command of the department of the west compounded with allegations of fraud and corruption .
lincoln overruled frmont 's proclamation .
lincoln believed that fremont 's emancipation was political ; neither militarily necessary nor legal .
after lincoln acted , union enlistments from maryland , kentucky , and missouri increased by over 40 , 000 troops .
lincoln left most diplomatic matters to his secretary of state , william seward .
at times seward was too bellicose , so for balance lincoln stuck a close working relationship with senator charles sumner , the chairman of the senate foreign relations committee .
the trent affair of late 1000 threatened war with great britain .
the u . s . navy had illegally intercepted a british mail ship , the " trent ", on the high seas and seized two confederate envoys ; britain protested vehemently while the u . s . cheered .
lincoln ended the crisis by releasing the two diplomats .
biographer james g . randall has dissected lincoln 's successful techniques :
lincoln painstakingly monitored the telegraphic reports coming into the war department headquarters .
he kept close tabs on all phases of the military effort , consulted with governors , and selected generals based on their past success ( as well as their state and party ).
in january 1000 , after many complaints of inefficiency and profiteering in the war department , lincoln replaced simon cameron with edwin stanton as war secretary .
stanton was a staunchly unionist pro-business conservative democrat who moved toward the radical republican faction .
nevertheless , he worked more often and more closely with lincoln than any other senior official .
" stanton and lincoln virtually conducted the war together ," say thomas and hyman .
in terms of war strategy , lincoln articulated two priorities : to ensure that washington was well-defended , and to conduct an aggressive war effort that would satisfy the demand in the north for prompt , decisive victory ; major northern newspaper editors expected victory within 90 days .
twice a week , lincoln would meet with his cabinet in the afternoon , and occasionally mary lincoln would force him to take a carriage ride because she was concerned he was working too hard .
lincoln learned from reading the theoretical book of his chief of staff general henry halleck , a disciple of the european strategist jomini ; he began to appreciate the critical need to control strategic points , such as the mississippi river .
lincoln saw the importance of vicksburg and understood the necessity of defeating the enemy 's army , rather than simply capturing territory .
after the union defeat at the first battle of bull run and the retirement of the aged winfield scott in late 1000 , lincoln appointed major general george b . mcclellan general-in-chief of all the union armies .
mcclellan , a young west point graduate , railroad executive , and pennsylvania democrat , took several months to plan and attempt his peninsula campaign , longer than lincoln wanted .
the campaign 's objective was to capture richmond by moving the army of the potomac by boat to the peninsula and then overland to the confederate capital .
mcclellan 's repeated delays frustrated lincoln and congress , as did his position that no troops were needed to defend washington .
lincoln insisted on holding some of mcclellan 's troops in defense of the capital ; mcclellan , who consistently overestimated the strength of confederate troops , blamed this decision for the ultimate failure of the peninsula campaign .
lincoln removed mcclellan as general-in-chief in march 1000 , after mcclellan 's " harrison 's landing letter ", in which he offered unsolicited political advice to lincoln urging caution in the war effort .
the office remained empty until july , when henry halleck was selected for it .
mcclellan 's letter incensed radical republicans , who successfully pressured lincoln to appoint john pope , a republican , as head of the new army of virginia .
pope complied with lincoln 's strategic desire to move toward richmond from the north , thus protecting the capital from attack .
however , lacking requested reinforcements from mcclellan , now commanding the army of the potomac , pope was soundly defeated at the second battle of bull run in the summer of 1000 , forcing the army of the potomac to defend washington for a second time .
the war also expanded with naval operations in 1000 when the css " virginia ", formerly the uss " merrimack ", damaged or destroyed three union vessels in norfolk , virginia , before being engaged and damaged by the uss " monitor ".
lincoln closely reviewed the dispatches and interrogated naval officers during their clash in the battle of hampton roads .
despite his dissatisfaction with mcclellan 's failure to reinforce pope , lincoln was desperate , and restored him to command of all forces around washington , to the dismay of all in his cabinet but seward .
two days after mcclellan 's return to command , general robert e . lee 's forces crossed the potomac river into maryland , leading to the battle of antietam in september 1000 .
the ensuing union victory was among the bloodiest in american history , but it enabled lincoln to announce that he would issue an emancipation proclamation in january .
having composed the proclamation some time earlier , lincoln had waited for a military victory to publish it to avoid it being perceived as the product of desperation .
mcclellan then resisted the president 's demand that he pursue lee 's retreating and exposed army , while his counterpart general don carlos buell likewise refused orders to move the army of the ohio against rebel forces in eastern tennessee .
as a result , lincoln replaced buell with william rosecrans ; and , after the 1000 midterm elections , he replaced mcclellan with republican ambrose burnside .
both of these replacements were political moderates and prospectively more supportive of the commander-in-chief .
burnside , against the advice of the president , prematurely launched an offensive across the rappahannock river and was stunningly defeated by lee at fredericksburg in december .
not only had burnside been defeated on the battlefield , but his soldiers were disgruntled and undisciplined .
desertions during 1000 were in the thousands and they increased after fredericksburg .
lincoln brought in joseph hooker , despite his record of loose talk about the need for a military dictatorship .
the mid-term elections in 1000 brought the republicans severe losses due to sharp disfavor with the administration over its failure to deliver a speedy end to the war , as well as rising inflation , new high taxes , rumors of corruption , the suspension of " habeas corpus ", the military draft law , and fears that freed slaves would undermine the labor market .
the emancipation proclamation announced in september gained votes for the republicans in the rural areas of new england and the upper midwest , but it lost votes in the cities and the lower midwest .
while republicans were discouraged , democrats were energized and did especially well in pennsylvania , ohio , indiana , and new york .
the republicans did maintain their majorities in congress and in the major states , except new york .
the cincinnati " gazette " contended that the voters were " depressed by the interminable nature of this war , as so far conducted , and by the rapid exhaustion of the national resources without progress ".
in the spring of 1000 , lincoln was optimistic about upcoming military campaigns to the point of thinking the end of the war could be near if a string of victories could be put together ; these plans included hooker 's attack on lee north of richmond , rosecrans ' on chattanooga , grant 's on vicksburg , and a naval assault on charleston .
hooker was routed by lee at the battle of chancellorsville in may , but continued to command his troops for some weeks .
he ignored lincoln 's order to divide his troops , and possibly force lee to do the same in harper 's ferry , and tendered his resignation , which lincoln accepted .
he was replaced by george meade , who followed lee into pennsylvania for the gettysburg campaign , which was a victory for the union , though lee 's army avoided capture .
at the same time , after initial setbacks , grant laid siege to vicksburg and the union navy attained some success in charleston harbor .
after the battle of gettysburg , lincoln clearly understood that his military decisions would be more effectively carried out by conveying his orders through his war secretary or his general-in-chief on to his generals , who resented his civilian interference with their own plans .
even so , he often continued to give detailed directions to his generals as commander-in-chief .
lincoln understood that the federal government 's power to end slavery was limited by the constitution , which before 1000 , committed the issue to individual states .
he argued before and during his election that the eventual extinction of slavery would result from preventing its expansion into new u . s . territory .
at the beginning of the war , he also sought to persuade the states to accept compensated emancipation in return for their prohibition of slavery .
lincoln believed that curtailing slavery in these ways would economically expunge it , as envisioned by the founding fathers , under the constitution .
president lincoln rejected two geographically limited emancipation attempts by major general john c . frmont in august 1000 and by major general david hunter in may 1000 , on the grounds that it was not within their power , and it would upset the border states loyal to the union .
on june 10 , 1000 , endorsed by lincoln , congress passed an act banning slavery on all federal territory .
in july , the confiscation act of 1000 was passed , which set up court procedures that could free the slaves of anyone convicted of aiding the rebellion .
although lincoln believed it was not within congress 's power to free the slaves within the states , he approved the bill in deference to the legislature .
he felt such action could only be taken by the commander-in-chief using war powers granted to the president by the constitution , and lincoln was planning to take that action .
in that month , lincoln discussed a draft of the emancipation proclamation with his cabinet .
in it , he stated that " as a fit and necessary military measure , on january 1 , 1000 , all persons held as slaves in the confederate states will thenceforward , and forever , be free ".
privately , lincoln concluded at this point that the slave base of the confederacy had to be eliminated .
however , copperheads argued that emancipation was a stumbling block to peace and reunification .
republican editor horace greeley of the highly influential " new york tribune " fell for the ploy , and lincoln refuted it directly in a shrewd letter of august 20 , 1000 .
although he said he personally wished all men could be free , lincoln stated that the primary goal of his actions as the u . s . president ( he used the first person pronoun and explicitly refers to his " official duty ") was that of preserving the union :
the emancipation proclamation , issued on september 20 , 1000 , and put into effect on january 1 , 1000 , declared free the slaves in 10 states not then under union control , with exemptions specified for areas already under union control in two states .
lincoln spent the next 100 days preparing the army and the nation for emancipation , while democrats rallied their voters in the 1000 off-year elections by warning of the threat freed slaves posed to northern whites .
once the abolition of slavery in the rebel states became a military objective , as union armies advanced south , more slaves were liberated until all three million of them in confederate territory were freed .
lincoln 's comment on the signing of the proclamation was : " i never , in my life , felt more certain that i was doing right , than i do in signing this paper ."
for some time , lincoln continued earlier plans to set up colonies for the newly freed slaves .
he commented favorably on colonization in the emancipation proclamation , but all attempts at such a massive undertaking failed .
a few days after emancipation was announced , 10 republican governors met at the war governors ' conference ; they supported the president 's proclamation , but suggested the removal of general george b . mcclellan as commander of the union army .
enlisting former slaves in the military was official government policy after the issuance of the emancipation proclamation .
by the spring of 1000 , lincoln was ready to recruit black troops in more than token numbers .
in a letter to andrew johnson , the military governor of tennessee , encouraging him to lead the way in raising black troops , lincoln wrote , " the bare sight of 50 , 000 armed and drilled black soldiers on the banks of the mississippi would end the rebellion at once ".
by the end of 1000 , at lincoln 's direction , general lorenzo thomas had recruited 20 regiments of blacks from the mississippi valley .
frederick douglass once observed of lincoln : " in his company , i was never reminded of my humble origin , or of my unpopular color ".
with the great union victory at the battle of gettysburg in july 1000 , and the defeat of the copperheads in the ohio election in the fall , lincoln maintained a strong base of party support and was in a strong position to redefine the war effort , despite the new york city draft riots .
the stage was set for his address at the gettysburg battlefield cemetery on november 10 , 1000 .
defying lincoln 's prediction that " the world will little note , nor long remember what we say here ", the address became the most quoted speech in american history .
in 200 words , and three minutes , lincoln asserted the nation was born not in 1000 , but in 1000 , " conceived in liberty , and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal ".
he defined the war as an effort dedicated to these principles of liberty and equality for all .
the emancipation of slaves was now part of the national war effort .
he declared that the deaths of so many brave soldiers would not be in vain , that slavery would end as a result of the losses , and the future of democracy in the world would be assured , that " government of the people , by the people , for the people , shall not perish from the earth ".
lincoln concluded that the civil war had a profound objective : a new birth of freedom in the nation .
meade 's failure to capture lee 's army as it retreated from gettysburg , and the continued passivity of the army of the potomac , persuaded lincoln that a change in command was needed .
general ulysses s . grant 's victories at the battle of shiloh and in the vicksburg campaign impressed lincoln and made grant a strong candidate to head the union army .
responding to criticism of grant after shiloh , lincoln had said , " i can ' t spare this man .
he fights ."
with grant in command , lincoln felt the union army could relentlessly pursue a series of coordinated offensives in multiple theaters , and have a top commander who agreed on the use of black troops .
nevertheless , lincoln was concerned that grant might be considering a candidacy for president in 1000 , as mcclellan was .
lincoln arranged for an intermediary to make inquiry into grant 's political intentions , and being assured that he had none , submitted to the senate grant 's promotion to commander of the union army .
he obtained congress 's consent to reinstate for grant the rank of lieutenant general , which no officer had held since george washington .
grant waged his bloody overland campaign in 1000 .
this is often characterized as a war of attrition , given high union losses at battles such as the battle of the wilderness and cold harbor .
even though they had the advantage of fighting on the defensive , the confederate forces had " almost as high a percentage of casualties as the union forces ".
the high casualty figures of the union alarmed the north ; grant had lost a third of his army , and lincoln asked what grant 's plans were , to which the general replied , " i propose to fight it out on this line if it takes all summer ."
the confederacy lacked reinforcements , so lee 's army shrank with every costly battle .
grant 's army moved south , crossed the james river , forcing a siege and trench warfare outside petersburg , virginia .
lincoln then made an extended visit to grant 's headquarters at city point , virginia .
this allowed the president to confer in person with grant and william tecumseh sherman about the hostilities , as sherman coincidentally managed a hasty visit to grant from his position in north carolina .
lincoln and the republican party mobilized support for the draft throughout the north , and replaced the union losses .
lincoln authorized grant to target the confederate infrastructuresuch as plantations , railroads , and bridgeshoping to destroy the south 's morale and weaken its economic ability to continue fighting .
grant 's move to petersburg resulted in the obstruction of three railroads between richmond and the south .
this strategy allowed generals sherman and philip sheridan to destroy plantations and towns in virginia 's shenandoah valley .
the damage caused by sherman 's march to the sea through georgia in 1000 was limited to a swath , but neither lincoln nor his commanders saw destruction as the main goal , but rather defeat of the confederate armies .
mark e . neely jr . has argued that there was no effort to engage in " total war " against civilians which he believed did take place during world war ii .
confederate general jubal early began a series of assaults in the north that threatened the capital .
during early 's raid on washington , d . c . in 1000 , lincoln was watching the combat from an exposed position ; captain oliver wendell holmes shouted at him , " get down , you damn fool , before you get shot !"
after repeated calls on grant to defend washington , sheridan was appointed and the threat from early was dispatched .
as grant continued to wear down lee 's forces , efforts to discuss peace began .
confederate vice president stephens led a group to meet with lincoln , seward , and others at hampton roads .
lincoln refused to allow any negotiation with the confederacy as a coequal ; his sole objective was an agreement to end the fighting and the meetings produced no results .
on april 1 , 1000 , grant successfully outflanked lee 's forces in the battle of five forks and nearly encircled petersburg , and the confederate government evacuated richmond .
days later , when that city fell , lincoln visited the vanquished confederate capital ; as he walked through the city , white southerners were stone-faced , but freedmen greeted him as a hero .
on april 9 , lee surrendered to grant at appomattox and the war was effectively over .
while the war was still being waged , lincoln faced reelection in 1000 .
lincoln was a master politician , bringing togetherand holding togetherall the main factions of the republican party , and bringing in war democrats such as edwin m . stanton and andrew johnson as well .
lincoln spent many hours a week talking to politicians from across the land and using his patronage powersgreatly expanded over peacetimeto hold the factions of his party together , build support for his own policies , and fend off efforts by radicals to drop him from the 1000 ticket .
at its 1000 convention , the republican party selected johnson , a war democrat from the southern state of tennessee , as his running mate .
to broaden his coalition to include war democrats as well as republicans , lincoln ran under the label of the new union party .
when grant 's 1000 spring campaigns turned into bloody stalemates and union casualties mounted , the lack of military success wore heavily on the president 's re-election prospects , and many republicans across the country feared that lincoln would be defeated .
sharing this fear , lincoln wrote and signed a pledge that , if he should lose the election , he would still defeat the confederacy before turning over the white house :
while the democratic platform followed the " peace wing " of the party and called the war a " failure ", their candidate , general george b . mcclellan , supported the war and repudiated the platform .
lincoln provided grant with more troops and mobilized his party to renew its support of grant in the war effort .
sherman 's capture of atlanta in september and david farragut 's capture of mobile ended defeatist jitters ; the democratic party was deeply split , with some leaders and most soldiers openly for lincoln .
by contrast , the national union party was united and energized as lincoln made emancipation the central issue , and state republican parties stressed the perfidy of the copperheads .
on november 8 , lincoln was re-elected in a landslide , carrying all but three states , and receiving 70 percent of the union soldiers ' vote .
on march 4 , 1000 , lincoln delivered his second inaugural address .
in it , he deemed the high casualties on both sides to be god 's will .
historian mark noll concludes it ranks " among the small handful of semi-sacred texts by which americans conceive their place in the world ".
lincoln said :
reconstruction began during the war , as lincoln and his associates anticipated questions of how to reintegrate the conquered southern states , and how to determine the fates of confederate leaders and freed slaves .
shortly after lee 's surrender , a general had asked lincoln how the defeated confederates should be treated , and lincoln replied , " let ' em up easy ."
in keeping with that sentiment , lincoln led the moderates regarding reconstruction policy , and was opposed by the radical republicans , under rep . thaddeus stevens , sen . charles sumner and sen . benjamin wade , political allies of the president on other issues .
determined to find a course that would reunite the nation and not alienate the south , lincoln urged that speedy elections under generous terms be held throughout the war .
his amnesty proclamation of december 8 , 1000 , offered pardons to those who had not held a confederate civil office , had not mistreated union prisoners , and would sign an oath of allegiance .
as southern states were subdued , critical decisions had to be made as to their leadership while their administrations were re-formed .
of special importance were tennessee and arkansas , where lincoln appointed generals andrew johnson and frederick steele as military governors , respectively .
in louisiana , lincoln ordered general nathaniel p . banks to promote a plan that would restore statehood when 10 percent of the voters agreed to it .
lincoln 's democratic opponents seized on these appointments to accuse him of using the military to ensure his and the republicans ' political aspirations .
on the other hand , the radicals denounced his policy as too lenient , and passed their own plan , the wade-davis bill , in 1000 .
when lincoln vetoed the bill , the radicals retaliated by refusing to seat representatives elected from louisiana , arkansas , and tennessee .
lincoln 's appointments were designed to keep both the moderate and radical factions in harness .
to fill chief justice taney 's seat on the supreme court , he named the choice of the radicals , salmon p . chase , who lincoln believed would uphold the emancipation and paper money policies .
after implementing the emancipation proclamation , which did not apply to every state , lincoln increased pressure on congress to outlaw slavery throughout the entire nation with a constitutional amendment .
lincoln declared that such an amendment would " clinch the whole matter ".
by december 1000 , a proposed constitutional amendment that would outlaw slavery was brought to congress for passage .
this first attempt at an amendment failed to pass , falling short of the required two-thirds majority on june 10 , 1000 , in the house of representatives .
passage of the proposed amendment became part of the republican/unionist platform in the election of 1000 .
after a long debate in the house , a second attempt passed congress on january 30 , 1000 , and was sent to the state legislatures for ratification .
upon ratification , it became the thirteenth amendment to the united states constitution on december 6 , 1000 .
as the war drew to a close , lincoln 's presidential reconstruction for the south was in flux ; having believed the federal government had limited responsibility to the millions of freedmen .
he signed into law senator charles sumner 's freedmen 's bureau bill that set up a temporary federal agency designed to meet the immediate material needs of former slaves .
the law assigned land for a lease of three years with the ability to purchase title for the freedmen .
lincoln stated that his louisiana plan did not apply to all states under reconstruction .
shortly before his assassination , lincoln announced he had a new plan for southern reconstruction .
discussions with his cabinet revealed lincoln planned short-term military control over southern states , until readmission under the control of southern unionists .
historians agree that it is impossible to predict exactly what lincoln would have done about reconstruction if he had lived , but they make projections based on his known policy positions and political acumen .
lincoln biographers james g . randall and richard current , according to david lincove , argue that :
eric foner argues that :
the successful reunification of the states had consequences for the name of the country .
the term " the united states " has historically been used , sometimes in the plural (" these united states "), and other times in the singular , without any particular grammatical consistency .
the civil war was a significant force in the eventual dominance of the singular usage by the end of the 10th century .
in recent years , historians such as harry jaffa , herman belz , john diggins , vernon burton and eric foner have stressed lincoln 's redefinition of " republican values ".
as early as the 1000s , a time when most political rhetoric focused on the sanctity of the constitution , lincoln redirected emphasis to the declaration of independence as the foundation of american political valueswhat he called the " sheet anchor " of republicanism .
the declaration 's emphasis on freedom and equality for all , in contrast to the constitution 's tolerance of slavery , shifted the debate .
as diggins concludes regarding the highly influential cooper union speech of early 1000 , " lincoln presented americans a theory of history that offers a profound contribution to the theory and destiny of republicanism itself ."
his position gained strength because he highlighted the moral basis of republicanism , rather than its legalisms .
nevertheless , in 1000 , lincoln justified the war in terms of legalisms ( the constitution was a contract , and for one party to get out of a contract all the other parties had to agree ), and then in terms of the national duty to guarantee a republican form of government in every state .
burton ( 2000 ) argues that lincoln 's republicanism was taken up by the freedmen as they were emancipated .
in march 1000 , in lincoln 's first inaugural address , he explored the nature of democracy .
he denounced secession as anarchy , and explained that majority rule had to be balanced by constitutional restraints in the american system .
he said " a majority held in restraint by constitutional checks and limitations , and always changing easily with deliberate changes of popular opinions and sentiments , is the only true sovereign of a free people ."
lincoln adhered to the whig theory of the presidency , which gave congress primary responsibility for writing the laws while the executive enforced them .
lincoln vetoed only four bills passed by congress ; the only important one was the wade-davis bill with its harsh program of reconstruction .
he signed the homestead act in 1000 , making millions of acres of government-held land in the west available for purchase at very low cost .
the morrill land-grant colleges act , also signed in 1000 , provided government grants for agricultural colleges in each state .
the pacific railway acts of 1000 and 1000 granted federal support for the construction of the united states ' first transcontinental railroad , which was completed in 1000 .
the passage of the homestead act and the pacific railway acts was made possible by the absence of southern congressmen and senators who had opposed the measures in the 1000s .
other important legislation involved two measures to raise revenues for the federal government : tariffs ( a policy with long precedent ), and a new federal income tax .
in 1000 , lincoln signed the second and third morrill tariff , the first having become law under james buchanan .
also in 1000 , lincoln signed the revenue act of 1000 , creating the first u . s . income tax .
this created a flat tax of 3 percent on incomes above $ 800 ($ in current dollar terms ), which was later changed by the revenue act of 1000 to a progressive rate structure .
lincoln also presided over the expansion of the federal government 's economic influence in several other areas .
the creation of the system of national banks by the national banking act provided a strong financial network in the country .
it also established a national currency .
in 1000 , congress created , with lincoln 's approval , the department of agriculture .
in 1000 , lincoln sent a senior general , john pope , to put down the " sioux uprising " in minnesota .
presented with 300 execution warrants for convicted santee dakota who were accused of killing innocent farmers , lincoln conducted his own personal review of each of these warrants , eventually approving 30 for execution ( one was later reprieved ).
president lincoln had planned to reform federal indian policy .
in the wake of grant 's casualties in his campaign against lee , lincoln had considered yet another executive call for a military draft , but it was never issued .
in response to rumors of one , however , the editors of the " new york world " and the " journal of commerce " published a false draft proclamation which created an opportunity for the editors and others employed at the publications to corner the gold market .
lincoln 's reaction was to send the strongest of messages to the media about such behavior ; he ordered the military to seize the two papers .
the seizure lasted for two days .
lincoln is largely responsible for the institution of the thanksgiving holiday in the united states .
before lincoln 's presidency , thanksgiving , while a regional holiday in new england since the 10th century , had been proclaimed by the federal government only sporadically and on irregular dates .
the last such proclamation had been during james madison 's presidency 50 years before .
in 1000 , lincoln declared the final thursday in november of that year to be a day of thanksgiving .
in june 1000 , lincoln approved the yosemite grant enacted by congress , which provided unprecedented federal protection for the area now known as yosemite national park .
lincoln 's declared philosophy on court nominations was that " we cannot ask a man what he will do , and if we should , and he should answer us , we should despise him for it .
therefore we must take a man whose opinions are known ."
lincoln made five appointments to the united states supreme court .
noah haynes swayne , nominated january 20 , 1000 , and appointed january 20 , 1000 , was chosen as an anti-slavery lawyer who was committed to the union .
samuel freeman miller , nominated and appointed on july 10 , 1000 , supported lincoln in the 1000 election and was an avowed abolitionist .
david davis , lincoln 's campaign manager in 1000 , nominated december 1 , 1000 , and appointed december 8 , 1000 , had also served as a judge in lincoln 's illinois court circuit .
stephen johnson field , a previous california supreme court justice , was nominated march 6 , 1000 , and appointed march 10 , 1000 , and provided geographic balance , as well as political balance to the court as a democrat .
finally , lincoln 's treasury secretary , salmon p . chase , was nominated as chief justice , and appointed the same day , on december 6 , 1000 .
lincoln believed chase was an able jurist , would support reconstruction legislation , and that his appointment united the republican party .
lincoln appointed 30 federal judges , including four associate justices and one chief justice to the supreme court of the united states , and 20 judges to the united states district courts .
lincoln appointed no judges to the united states circuit courts during his time in office .
west virginia , admitted to the union june 20 , 1000 , contained the former north-westernmost counties of virginia that seceded from virginia after that commonwealth declared its secession from the union .
as a condition for its admission , west virginia 's constitution was required to provide for the gradual abolition of slavery .
nevada , which became the third state in the far-west of the continent , was admitted as a free state on october 30 , 1000 .
abraham lincoln was assassinated by john wilkes booth on good friday , april 10 , 1000 , while attending a play at ford 's theatre as the american civil war was drawing to a close .
the assassination occurred five days after the surrender of robert e . lee and the confederate army of northern virginia .
booth was a well-known actor and a confederate spy from maryland ; though he never joined the confederate army , he had contacts with the confederate secret service .
in 1000 , booth formulated a plan ( very similar to one of thomas n . conrad previously authorized by the confederacy ) to kidnap lincoln in exchange for the release of confederate prisoners .
after attending an april 10 , 1000 , speech in which lincoln promoted voting rights for blacks , an incensed booth changed his plans and became determined to assassinate the president .
learning that the president and grant would be attending ford 's theatre , booth formulated a plan with co-conspirators to assassinate lincoln and grant at the theater , as well as vice president johnson and secretary of state seward at their homes .
without his main bodyguard , ward hill lamon , lincoln left to attend the play " our american cousin " on april 10 .
at the last minute , grant decided to go to new jersey to visit his children instead of attending the play .
lincoln 's bodyguard , john parker , left ford 's theater during intermission to drink at the saloon next door .
the now unguarded president sat in his state box in the balcony .
seizing the opportunity , booth crept up from behind and at about 10:10pm , aimed at the back of lincoln 's head and fired at point-blank range , mortally wounding the president .
major henry rathbone momentarily grappled with booth , but booth stabbed him and escaped .
after being on the run for 10 days , booth was tracked down and found on a farm in virginia , some south of washington .
after refusing to surrender to union troops , booth was killed by sergeant boston corbett on april 20 .
doctor charles leale , an army surgeon , found the president unresponsive , barely breathing and with no detectable pulse .
having determined that the president had been shot in the head , and not stabbed in the shoulder as originally thought , he made an attempt to clear the blood clot , after which the president began to breathe more naturally .
the dying president was taken across the street to petersen house .
after remaining in a coma for nine hours , lincoln died at 7:20am on april 10 .
secretary of war stanton saluted and said , " now he belongs to the ages ."
lincoln 's flag-enfolded body was then escorted in the rain to the white house by bareheaded union officers , while the city 's church bells rang .
president johnson was sworn in at 10:00am , less than 3 hours after lincoln 's death .
the late president lay in state in the east room , and then in the capitol rotunda from april 10 through april 20 .
for his final journey with his son willie , both caskets were transported in the executive coach " united states " and for three weeks the " lincoln special " funeral train decorated in black bunting bore lincoln 's remains on a slow circuitous waypoint journey from washington d . c . to springfield , illinois , stopping at many cities across the north for large-scale memorials attended by hundreds of thousands , as well as many people who gathered in informal trackside tributes with bands , bonfires , and hymn singing or silent reverence with hat in hand as the railway procession slowly passed by .
poet walt whitman composed " when lilacs last in the dooryard bloom ' d " to eulogize lincoln , one of four poems he wrote about the assassinated president .
historians have emphasized the widespread shock and sorrow , but also noted that some lincoln haters cheered when they heard the news .
african-americans were especially moved ; they had lost ' their moses '.
in a larger sense , the outpouring of grief and anguish was in response to the deaths of so many men in the war that had just ended .
as a young man , lincoln was a religious skeptic , or , in the words of a biographer , an iconoclast .
later in life , lincoln 's frequent use of religious imagery and language might have reflected his own personal beliefs or might have been a device to appeal to his audiences , who were mostly evangelical protestants .
he never joined a church , although he frequently attended with his wife .
however , he was deeply familiar with the bible , and he both quoted and praised it .
he was private about his beliefs and respected the beliefs of others .
lincoln never made a clear profession of christian beliefs .
however , he did believe in an all-powerful god that shaped events and , by 1000 , was expressing those beliefs in major speeches .
in the 1000s , lincoln subscribed to the doctrine of necessity , a belief that asserted the human mind was controlled by some higher power .
in the 1000s , lincoln believed in " providence " in a general way , and rarely used the language or imagery of the evangelicals ; he regarded the republicanism of the founding fathers with an almost religious reverence .
when he suffered the death of his son edward , lincoln more frequently expressed a need to depend on god .
the death of his son willie in february 1000 may have caused lincoln to look toward religion for answers and solace .
after willie 's death , lincoln considered why , from a divine standpoint , the severity of the war was necessary .
he wrote at this time that god " could have either saved or destroyed the union without a human contest .
yet the contest began .
and having begun he could give the final victory to either side any day .
yet the contest proceeds ."
on the day lincoln was assassinated , he reportedly told his wife he desired to visit the holy land .
several claims abound that lincoln 's health was declining before the assassination .
these are often based on photographs appearing to show weight loss and muscle wasting .
one such claim is that he suffered from a rare genetic disorder , men2b , which manifests with a medullary thyroid carcinoma , mucosal neuromas and a marfanoid appearance .
others simply claim he had marfan syndrome , based on his tall appearance with spindly fingers , and the association of possible aortic regurgitation , which can cause bobbing of the head ( demusset 's sign ) based on blurring of lincoln 's head in photographs , which back then had a long exposure time .
, dna analysis was being refused by the grand army of the republic museum in philadelphia .
in surveys of u . s . scholars ranking presidents conducted since the 1000s , lincoln is consistently ranked in the top three , often as number one .
a 2000 study found that scholars in the fields of history and politics ranked lincoln number one , while legal scholars placed him second after washington .
in presidential ranking polls conducted in the united states since 1000 , lincoln has been rated at the very top in the majority of polls .
generally , the top three presidents are rated as 1 .
lincoln ; 2 .
george washington ; and 3 .
franklin d . roosevelt , although lincoln and washington , and washington and roosevelt , are occasionally reversed .
president lincoln 's assassination increased his status to the point of making him a national martyr .
lincoln was viewed by abolitionists as a champion for human liberty .
republicans linked lincoln 's name to their party .
many , though not all , in the south considered lincoln as a man of outstanding ability .
historians have said he was " a classical liberal " in the 10th century sense .
allen c . guelzo states that lincoln was a :
lincoln became a favorite exemplar for liberal intellectuals across europe and latin america and even in asia .
schwartz argues that lincoln 's american reputation grew slowly in the late 10th century until the progressive era ( 10000000s ) when he emerged as one of the most venerated heroes in american history , with even white southerners in agreement .
the high point came in 1000 with the dedication of the lincoln memorial on the national mall in washington , d . c .
in the new deal era liberals honored lincoln not so much as the self-made man or the great war president , but as the advocate of the common man who they believe would have supported the welfare state .
in the cold war years , lincoln 's image shifted to emphasize the symbol of freedom who brought hope to those oppressed by communist regimes .
by the 1000s lincoln had become a hero to political conservatives for his intense nationalism , support for business , his insistence on stopping the spread of human bondage , his acting in terms of lockean and burkean principles on behalf of both liberty and tradition , and his devotion to the principles of the founding fathers .
as a whig activist , lincoln was a spokesman for business interests , favoring high tariffs , banks , internal improvements , and railroads in opposition to the agrarian democrats .
william c . harris found that lincoln 's " reverence for the founding fathers , the constitution , the laws under it , and the preservation of the republic and its institutions undergirded and strengthened his conservatism ".
james g . randall emphasizes his tolerance and especially his moderation " in his preference for orderly progress , his distrust of dangerous agitation , and his reluctance toward ill digested schemes of reform ".
randall concludes that , " he was conservative in his complete avoidance of that type of so-called ' radicalism ' which involved abuse of the south , hatred for the slaveholder , thirst for vengeance , partisan plotting , and ungenerous demands that southern institutions be transformed overnight by outsiders ."
by the late 1000s , some african american intellectuals led by lerone bennett jr ., rejected lincoln 's role as the great emancipator .
bennett won wide attention when he called lincoln a white supremacist in 1000 .
he noted that lincoln used ethnic slurs and told jokes that ridiculed blacks .
bennett argued that lincoln opposed social equality , and proposed sending freed slaves to another country .
defenders , such as authors dirck and cashin , retorted that he was not as bad as most politicians of his day ; and that he was a " moral visionary " who deftly advanced the abolitionist cause , as fast as politically possible .
the emphasis shifted away from lincoln-the-emancipator to an argument that blacks had freed themselves from slavery , or at least were responsible for pressuring the government on emancipation .
historian barry schwartz wrote in 2000 that lincoln 's image suffered " erosion , fading prestige , benign ridicule " in the late 20th century .
on the other hand , donald opined in his 1000 biography that lincoln was distinctly endowed with the personality trait of negative capability , defined by the poet john keats and attributed to extraordinary leaders who were " content in the midst of uncertainties and doubts , and not compelled toward fact or reason ".
in the 20st century , president barack obama named lincoln his favorite president and insisted on using lincoln 's bible for his swearing in to office at both his inaugurations .
lincoln has often been portrayed by hollywood , almost always in a flattering light .
lincoln 's portrait appears on two denominations of united states currency , the penny and the $ 5 bill .
his likeness also appears on many postage stamps and he has been memorialized in many town , city , and county names , including the capital of nebraska .
while he is usually portrayed bearded , he first grew a beard in 1000 at the suggestion of 10-year old grace bedell .
the most famous and most visited memorials are lincoln 's sculpture on mount rushmore ; lincoln memorial , ford 's theatre , and petersen house ( where he died ) in washington , d . c .; and the abraham lincoln presidential library and museum in springfield , illinois , not far from lincoln 's home , as well as his tomb .
there was also the great moments with mr . lincoln exhibit in disneyland , and the hall of presidents at walt disney world , which had to do with walt disney admiring lincoln ever since he was a little boy .
barry schwartz , a sociologist who has examined america 's cultural memory , argues that in the 1000s and 1000s , the memory of abraham lincoln was practically sacred and provided the nation with " a moral symbol inspiring and guiding american life ".
during the great depression , he argues , lincoln served " as a means for seeing the world 's disappointments , for making its sufferings not so much explicable as meaningful ".
franklin d . roosevelt , preparing america for war , used the words of the civil war president to clarify the threat posed by germany and japan .
americans asked , " what would lincoln do ?"
however , schwartz also finds that since world war ii , lincoln 's symbolic power has lost relevance , and this " fading hero is symptomatic of fading confidence in national greatness ".
he suggested that postmodernism and multiculturalism have diluted greatness as a concept .
the united states navy is named after lincoln , the second navy ship to bear his name .
aristotle
aristotle (; , , " aristotls "; 300000bc ) was an ancient greek philosopher and scientist born in the city of stagira , chalkidice , on the northern periphery of classical greece .
his father , nicomachus , died when aristotle was a child , whereafter proxenus of atarneus became his guardian .
at seventeen or eighteen years of age , he joined plato 's academy in athens and remained there until the age of thirty-seven ( c . 300bc ).
his writings cover many subjects including physics , biology , zoology , metaphysics , logic , ethics , aesthetics , poetry , theater , music , rhetoric , linguistics , politics and government and constitute the first comprehensive system of western philosophy .
shortly after plato died , aristotle left athens and , at the request of philip ii of macedon , tutored alexander the great beginning in 300bc .
teaching alexander the great gave aristotle many opportunities and an abundance of supplies .
he established a library in the lyceum which aided in the production of many of his hundreds of books , which were written on papyrus scrolls .
the fact that aristotle was a pupil of plato contributed to his former views of platonism , but , following plato 's death , aristotle immersed himself in empirical studies and shifted from platonism to empiricism .
he believed all peoples ' concepts and all of their knowledge was ultimately based on perception .
aristotle 's views on natural sciences represent the groundwork underlying many of his works .
aristotle 's views on physical science profoundly shaped medieval scholarship .
their influence extended from late antiquity and the early middle ages into the renaissance , and were not replaced systematically until the enlightenment and theories such as classical mechanics .
some of aristotle 's zoological observations , such as on the hectocotyl ( reproductive ) arm of the octopus , were not confirmed or refuted until the 10th century .
his works contain the earliest known formal study of logic , which was incorporated in the late 10th century into modern formal logic .
in metaphysics , aristotelianism profoundly influenced jewish and islamic philosophical and theological thought during the middle ages and continues to influence christian theology , especially the neoplatonism of the early church and the scholastic tradition of the catholic church .
aristotle was well known among medieval muslim scholars , and has been revered as " the first teacher " ().
his ethics , though always influential , gained renewed interest with the modern advent of virtue ethics .
all aspects of aristotle 's philosophy continue to be the object of active academic study today .
though aristotle wrote many elegant treatises and dialogues cicero described his literary style as " a river of gold " it is thought that only around a third of his original output has survived .
aristotle , whose name means " the best purpose ", was born in 300bc in stagira , chalcidice , about 50km ( 30 miles ) east of modern-day thessaloniki .
his father nicomachus was the personal physician to king amyntas of macedon .
aristotle was orphaned at a young age .
although there is little information on aristotle 's childhood , he probably spent some time within the macedonian palace , making his first connections with the macedonian monarchy .
at the age of seventeen or eighteen , aristotle moved to athens to continue his education at plato 's academy .
he remained there for nearly twenty years before leaving athens in 300/40bc .
the traditional story about his departure records that he was disappointed with the academy 's direction after control passed to plato 's nephew speusippus , although it is possible that he feared anti-macedonian sentiments and left before plato died .
aristotle then accompanied xenocrates to the court of his friend hermias of atarneus in asia minor .
there , he traveled with theophrastus to the island of lesbos , where together they researched the botany and zoology of the island .
aristotle married pythias , either hermias 's adoptive daughter or niece .
she bore him a daughter , whom they also named pythias .
soon after hermias ' death , aristotle was invited by philip ii of macedon to become the tutor to his son alexander in 300bc .
aristotle was appointed as the head of the royal academy of macedon .
during that time he gave lessons not only to alexander , but also to two other future kings : ptolemy and cassander .
aristotle encouraged alexander toward eastern conquest and his attitude towards persia was unabashedly ethnocentric .
in one famous example , he counsels alexander to be " a leader to the greeks and a despot to the barbarians , to look after the former as after friends and relatives , and to deal with the latter as with beasts or plants ".
by 300bc , aristotle had returned to athens , establishing his own school there known as the lyceum .
aristotle conducted courses at the school for the next twelve years .
while in athens , his wife pythias died and aristotle became involved with herpyllis of stagira , who bore him a son whom he named after his father , nicomachus .
according to the suda , he also had an eromenos , palaephatus of abydus .
this period in athens , between 300 and 300bc , is when aristotle is believed to have composed many of his works .
he wrote many dialogues of which only fragments have survived .
those works that have survived are in treatise form and were not , for the most part , intended for widespread publication ; they are generally thought to be lecture aids for his students .
his most important treatises include " physics ", " metaphysics ", " nicomachean ethics ", " politics ", " de anima " (" on the soul ") and " poetics ".
aristotle not only studied almost every subject possible at the time , but made significant contributions to most of them .
in physical science , aristotle studied anatomy , astronomy , embryology , geography , geology , meteorology , physics and zoology .
in philosophy , he wrote on aesthetics , ethics , government , metaphysics , politics , economics , psychology , rhetoric and theology .
he also studied education , foreign customs , literature and poetry .
his combined works constitute a virtual encyclopedia of greek knowledge .
near the end of his life , alexander and aristotle became estranged over alexander 's relationship with persia and persians .
a widespread tradition in antiquity suspected aristotle of playing a role in alexander 's death , but the only evidence of this is an unlikely claim made some six years after the death .
following alexander 's death , anti-macedonian sentiment in athens was rekindled .
in 300bc , demophilus and eurymedon the hierophant reportedly denounced aristotle for impiety , prompting him to flee to his mother 's family estate in chalcis , at which occasion he was said to have stated : " i will not allow the athenians to sin twice against philosophy " a reference to athens 's prior trial and execution of socrates .
he died in euboea of natural causes later that same year , having named his student antipater as his chief executor and leaving a will in which he asked to be buried next to his wife .
charles walston argues that the tomb of aristotle is located on the sacred way between chalcis and eretria and to have contained two styluses , a pen , a signet-ring and some terra-cottas as well as what is supposed to be the earthly remains of aristotle in the form of some skull fragments .
in general , the details of the life of aristotle are not well-established .
the biographies of aristotle written in ancient times are often speculative and historians only agree on a few salient points .
with the " prior analytics ", aristotle is credited with the earliest study of formal logic , and his conception of it was the dominant form of western logic until 10th century advances in mathematical logic .
kant stated in the " critique of pure reason " ( preface to the second edition , 1000 ) that with aristotle logic reached its completion .
aristotle " says that ' on the subject of reasoning ' he ' had nothing else on an earlier date to speak of '".
however , plato reports that syntax was devised before him , by prodicus of ceos , who was concerned by the correct use of words .
logic seems to have emerged from dialectics ; the earlier philosophers made frequent use of concepts like " reductio ad absurdum " in their discussions , but never truly understood the logical implications .
even plato had difficulties with logic ; although he had a reasonable conception of a deductive system , he could never actually construct one , thus he relied instead on his dialectic .
plato believed that deduction would simply follow from premises , hence he focused on maintaining solid premises so that the conclusion would logically follow .
consequently , plato realized that a method for obtaining conclusions would be most beneficial .
he never succeeded in devising such a method , but his best attempt was published in his book " sophist ", where he introduced his division method .
what we today call " aristotelian logic ", aristotle himself would have labeled " analytics ".
the term " logic " he reserved to mean " dialectics ".
most of aristotle 's work is probably not in its original form , because it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers .
the logical works of aristotle were compiled into six books in about the early 1st century ce :
the order of the books ( or the teachings from which they are composed ) is not certain , but this list was derived from analysis of aristotle 's writings .
it goes from the basics , the analysis of simple terms in the " categories ," the analysis of propositions and their elementary relations in " on interpretation ", to the study of more complex forms , namely , syllogisms ( in the " analytics ") and dialectics ( in the " topics " and " sophistical refutations ").
the first three treatises form the core of the logical theory " stricto sensu ": the grammar of the language of logic and the correct rules of reasoning .
there is one volume of aristotle 's concerning logic not found in the " organon ", namely the fourth book of " metaphysics ."
like his teacher plato , aristotle 's philosophy aims at the universal .
aristotle 's ontology , however , finds the universal in particular things , which he calls the essence of things , while in plato 's ontology , the universal exists apart from particular things , and is related to them as their prototype or exemplar .
for aristotle , therefore , epistemology is based on the study of particular phenomena and rises to the knowledge of essences , while for plato epistemology begins with knowledge of universal forms ( or ideas ) and descends to knowledge of particular imitations of these .
for aristotle , " form " still refers to the unconditional basis of phenomena but is " instantiated " in a particular substance ( see " universals and particulars ", below ).
in a certain sense , aristotle 's method is both inductive and deductive , while plato 's is essentially deductive from " a priori " principles .
in aristotle 's terminology , " natural philosophy " is a branch of philosophy examining the phenomena of the natural world , and includes fields that would be regarded today as physics , biology and other natural sciences .
in modern times , the scope of " philosophy " has become limited to more generic or abstract inquiries , such as ethics and metaphysics , in which logic plays a major role .
today 's philosophy tends to exclude empirical study of the natural world by means of the scientific method .
in contrast , aristotle 's philosophical endeavors encompassed virtually all facets of intellectual inquiry .
in the larger sense of the word , aristotle makes philosophy coextensive with reasoning , which he also would describe as " science ".
note , however , that his use of the term " science " carries a different meaning than that covered by the term " scientific method ".
for aristotle , " all science (" dianoia ") is either practical , poetical or theoretical " (" metaphysics " 1000b20 ).
by practical science , he means ethics and politics ; by poetical science , he means the study of poetry and the other fine arts ; by theoretical science , he means physics , mathematics and metaphysics .
if logic ( or " analytics ") is regarded as a study preliminary to philosophy , the divisions of aristotelian philosophy would consist of : ( 1 ) logic ; ( 2 ) theoretical philosophy , including metaphysics , physics and mathematics ; ( 3 ) practical philosophy and ( 4 ) poetical philosophy .
in the period between his two stays in athens , between his times at the academy and the lyceum , aristotle conducted most of the scientific thinking and research for which he is renowned today .
in fact , most of aristotle 's life was devoted to the study of the objects of natural science .
aristotle 's metaphysics contains observations on the nature of numbers but he made no original contributions to mathematics .
he did , however , perform original research in the natural sciences , e . g ., botany , zoology , physics , astronomy , chemistry , meteorology , and several other sciences .
aristotle 's writings on science are largely qualitative , as opposed to quantitative .
beginning in the 10th century , scientists began applying mathematics to the physical sciences , and aristotle 's work in this area was deemed hopelessly inadequate .
his failings were largely due to the absence of concepts like mass , velocity , force and temperature .
he had a conception of speed and temperature , but no quantitative understanding of them , which was partly due to the absence of basic experimental devices , like clocks and thermometers .
his writings provide an account of many scientific observations , a mixture of precocious accuracy and curious errors .
for example , in his " history of animals " he claimed that human males have more teeth than females .
in a similar vein , john philoponus , and later galileo , showed by simple experiments that aristotle 's theory that a heavier object falls faster than a lighter object is incorrect .
on the other hand , aristotle refuted democritus 's claim that the milky way was made up of " those stars which are shaded by the earth from the sun 's rays ," pointing out ( correctly , even if such reasoning was bound to be dismissed for a long time ) that , given " current astronomical demonstrations " that " the size of the sun is greater than that of the earth and the distance of the stars from the earth many times greater than that of the sun , then ... the sun shines on all the stars and the earth screens none of them ."
aristotle also had some scientific blind spots .
he posited a geocentric cosmology that we may discern in selections of the " metaphysics ", which was widely accepted up until the 10th century .
from the 3rd century to the 10th century , the dominant view held that the earth was the rotational center of the universe .
because he was perhaps the philosopher most respected by european thinkers during and after the renaissance , these thinkers often took aristotle 's erroneous positions as given , which held back science in this epoch .
however , aristotle 's scientific shortcomings should not mislead one into forgetting his great advances in the many scientific fields .
for instance , he founded logic as a formal science and created foundations to biology that were not superseded for two millennia .
moreover , he introduced the fundamental notion that nature is composed of things that change and that studying such changes can provide useful knowledge of underlying constants .
as quoted from charles lyell 's " principles of geology ": he [ aristotle ] refers to many examples of changes now constantly going on , and insists emphatically on the great results which they must produce in the lapse of ages .
he instances particular cases of lakes that had dried up , and deserts that had at length become watered by rivers and fertilized .
he points to the growth of the nilotic delta since the time of homer , to the shallowing of the palus maeotis within sixty years from his own time ...
he alludes ... to the upheaving of one of the eolian islands , previous to a volcanic eruption .
the changes of the earth , he says , are so slow in comparison to the duration of our lives , that they are overlooked ; and the migrations of people after great catastrophes , and their removal to other regions , cause the event to be forgotten .
he says [ 10th chapter of his " meteorics "] ' the distribution of land and sea in particular regions does not endure throughout all time , but it becomes sea in those parts where it was land , and again it becomes land where it was sea , and there is reason for thinking that these changes take place according to a certain system , and within a certain period .'
the concluding observation is as follows : ' as time never fails , and the universe is eternal , neither the tanais , nor the nile , can have flowed for ever .
the places where they rise were once dry , and there is a limit to their operations , but there is none to time .
so also of all other rivers ; they spring up and they perish ; and the sea also continually deserts some lands and invades others the same tracts , therefore , of the earth are not some always sea , and others always continents , but every thing changes in the course of time .'
aristotle proposed a fifth element , aether , in addition to the four proposed earlier by empedocles .
each of the four earthly elements has its natural place .
all that is earthly tends toward the center of the universe , i . e ., the center of the earth .
water tends toward a sphere surrounding the center .
air tends toward a sphere surrounding the water sphere .
fire tends toward the lunar sphere ( in which the moon orbits ).
when elements are moved out of their natural place , they naturally move back towards it .
this is " natural motion " motion requiring no extrinsic cause .
so , for example , in water , earthy bodies sink while air bubbles rise up ; in air , rain falls and flame rises .
outside all the other spheres , the heavenly , fifth element , manifested in the stars and planets , moves in the perfection of circles .
aristotle defined motion as the actuality of a potentiality " as such ".
aquinas suggested that the passage be understood literally ; that motion can indeed be understood as the active fulfillment of a potential , as a transition toward a potentially possible state .
because actuality and potentiality are normally opposites in aristotle , other commentators either suggest that the wording which has come down to us is erroneous , or that the addition of the " as such " to the definition is critical to understanding it .
aristotle suggested that the reason for anything coming about can be attributed to four different types of simultaneously active factors .
his name " aitia " is traditionally translated as " cause ", but it does not always refer to temporal sequence ; it might be better translated as " explanation ", but the traditional rendering will be employed here .
additionally , things can be causes of one another , causing each other reciprocally , as hard work causes fitness and vice versa , although not in the same way or function , the one is as the beginning of change , the other as the goal .
( thus aristotle first suggested a reciprocal or circular causality as a relation of mutual dependence or influence of cause upon effect .)
moreover , aristotle indicated that the same thing can be the cause of contrary effects ; its presence and absence may result in different outcomes .
simply it is the goal or purpose that brings about an event .
our two dominoes require someone or something to intentionally knock over the first domino , because it cannot fall of its own accord .
aristotle marked two modes of causation : proper ( prior ) causation and accidental ( chance ) causation .
all causes , both proper and incidental , can be spoken of as actual or potential , and as generic or particular .
the same language refers to the effects of causes , so that actual effects are assigned to operating causes , generic effects to generic causes , and particular effects to particular causes .
aristotle held more accurate theories on some optical concepts than other philosophers of his day .
the second oldest written evidence of a camera obscura ( after mozi c . 400 bc ) can be found in aristotle 's documentation of such a device in 300bc in " problemata ".
aristotle 's apparatus contained a dark chamber that had a single small hole , or aperture , to allow for sunlight to enter .
aristotle used the device to make observations of the sun and noted that no matter what shape the hole was , the sun would still be correctly displayed as a round object .
in modern cameras , this is analogous to the diaphragm .
aristotle also made the observation that when the distance between the aperture and the surface with the image increased , the image was magnified .
according to aristotle , spontaneity and chance are causes of some things , distinguishable from other types of cause .
chance as an incidental cause lies in the realm of accidental things .
it is " from what is spontaneous " ( but note that what is spontaneous does not come from chance ).
for a better understanding of aristotle 's conception of " chance " it might be better to think of " coincidence ": something takes place by chance if a person sets out with the intent of having one thing take place , but with the result of another thing ( not intended ) taking place .
for example : a person seeks donations .
that person may find another person willing to donate a substantial sum .
however , if the person seeking the donations met the person donating , not for the purpose of collecting donations , but for some other purpose , aristotle would call the collecting of the donation by that particular donator a result of chance .
it must be unusual that something happens by chance .
in other words , if something happens all or most of the time , we cannot say that it is by chance .
there is also more specific kind of chance , which aristotle names " luck ", that can only apply to human beings , because it is in the sphere of moral actions .
according to aristotle , luck must involve choice ( and thus deliberation ), and only humans are capable of deliberation and choice .
" what is not capable of action cannot do anything by chance ".
aristotle defines metaphysics as " the knowledge of immaterial being ," or of " being in the highest degree of abstraction ."
he refers to metaphysics as " first philosophy ", as well as " the theologic science ".
aristotle examines the concepts of substance and essence (" ousia ") in his " metaphysics " ( book vii ), and he concludes that a particular substance is a combination of both matter and form .
in book viii , he distinguishes the matter of the substance as the substratum , or the stuff of which it is composed .
for example , the matter of a house is the bricks , stones , timbers etc ., or whatever constitutes the " potential " house , while the form of the substance is the " actual " house , namely ' covering for bodies and chattels ' or any other differentia ( see also predicables ) that let us define something as a house .
the formula that gives the components is the account of the matter , and the formula that gives the differentia is the account of the form .
with regard to the change (" kinesis ") and its causes now , as he defines in his " physics " and " on generation and corruption " 300b300a , he distinguishes the coming to be from :
the coming to be is a change where nothing persists of which the resultant is a property .
in that particular change he introduces the concept of potentiality (" dynamis ") and actuality (" entelecheia ") in association with the matter and the form .
referring to potentiality , this is what a thing is capable of doing , or being acted upon , if the conditions are right and it is not prevented by something else .
for example , the seed of a plant in the soil is potentially (" dynamei ") plant , and if is not prevented by something , it will become a plant .
potentially beings can either ' act ' (" poiein ") or ' be acted upon ' (" paschein "), which can be either innate or learned .
for example , the eyes possess the potentiality of sight ( innate being acted upon ), while the capability of playing the flute can be possessed by learning ( exercise acting ).
actuality is the fulfillment of the end of the potentiality .
because the end (" telos ") is the principle of every change , and for the sake of the end exists potentiality , therefore actuality is the end .
referring then to our previous example , we could say that an actuality is when a plant does one of the activities that plants do .
for that for the sake of which a thing is , is its principle , and the becoming is for the sake of the end ; and the actuality is the end , and it is for the sake of this that the potentiality is acquired .
for animals do not see in order that they may have sight , but they have sight that they may see .
in summary , the matter used to make a house has potentiality to be a house and both the activity of building and the form of the final house are actualities , which is also a final cause or end .
then aristotle proceeds and concludes that the actuality is prior to potentiality in formula , in time and in substantiality .
with this definition of the particular substance ( i . e ., matter and form ), aristotle tries to solve the problem of the unity of the beings , for example , " what is it that makes a man one "?
since , according to plato there are two ideas : animal and biped , how then is man a unity ?
however , according to aristotle , the potential being ( matter ) and the actual one ( form ) are one and the same thing .
aristotle 's predecessor , plato , argued that all things have a universal form , which could be either a property or a relation to other things .
when we look at an apple , for example , we see an apple , and we can also analyze a form of an apple .
in this distinction , there is a particular apple and a universal form of an apple .
moreover , we can place an apple next to a book , so that we can speak of both the book and apple as being next to each other .
plato argued that there are some universal forms that are not a part of particular things .
for example , it is possible that there is no particular good in existence , but " good " is still a proper universal form .
bertrand russell is a 20th-century philosopher who agreed with plato on the existence of " uninstantiated universals ".
aristotle disagreed with plato on this point , arguing that all universals are instantiated .
aristotle argued that there are no universals that are unattached to existing things .
according to aristotle , if a universal exists , either as a particular or a relation , then there must have been , must be currently , or must be in the future , something on which the universal can be predicated .
consequently , according to aristotle , if it is not the case that some universal can be predicated to an object that exists at some period of time , then it does not exist .
in addition , aristotle disagreed with plato about the location of universals .
as plato spoke of the world of the forms , a location where all universal forms subsist , aristotle maintained that universals exist within each thing on which each universal is predicated .
so , according to aristotle , the form of apple exists within each apple , rather than in the world of the forms .
in aristotelian science , especially in biology , things he saw himself have stood the test of time better than his retelling of the reports of others , which contain error and superstition .
he dissected animals but not humans ; his ideas on how the human body works have been almost entirely superseded .
aristotle is the earliest natural historian whose work has survived in some detail .
aristotle certainly did research on the natural history of lesbos , and the surrounding seas and neighbouring areas .
the works that reflect this research , the " history of animals ", " generation of animals ", " movement of animals ", and " parts of animals ", contain some observations and interpretations , along with sundry myths and mistakes .
the most striking passages are about the sea-life visible from observation on lesbos and available from the catches of fishermen .
his observations on catfish , electric fish (" torpedo ") and angler-fish are detailed , as is his writing on cephalopods , namely , " octopus ", " sepia " ( cuttlefish ) and the paper nautilus (" argonauta argo ").
his description of the hectocotyl arm , used in sexual reproduction , was widely disbelieved until its rediscovery in the 10th century .
he separated the aquatic mammals from fish , and knew that sharks and rays were part of the group he called selach ( greek for 's harks ').
an example of his methods , including dissection and observation , comes from the " generation of animals ", where he describes breaking open fertilized chicken eggs at intervals to discover the sequence in which visible organs are generated .
aristotle gave accurate descriptions of the four-chambered fore-stomachs of ruminants , and of the ovoviviparous embryological development of the hound shark " mustelus mustelus ".
aristotle distinguished about 500 species of birds , mammals and fishes .
what the modern zoologist would call vertebrates and invertebrates , aristotle called ' animals with blood ' and ' animals without blood '.
animals with blood were divided into live-bearing ( mammals ), and egg-bearing ( birds and fish ).
invertebrates (' animals without blood ') are insects , crustacea ( divided into non-shelled cephalopods and shelled ) and testacea ( molluscs ).
aristotle believed that intellectual purposes , i . e ., final causes , guided all natural processes .
such a teleological view gave aristotle cause to justify his observed data as an expression of formal design .
noting that " no animal has , at the same time , both tusks and horns ," and " a single-hooved animal with two horns i have never seen ," aristotle suggested that nature , giving no animal both horns and tusks , was staving off vanity , and giving creatures faculties only to such a degree as they are necessary .
noting that ruminants had multiple stomachs and weak teeth , he supposed the first was to compensate for the latter , with nature trying to preserve a type of balance .
he stated in the " history of animals " that creatures were arranged in a graded scale of perfection rising from minerals to plants and animals , and on up to man , forming the " scala naturae " or great chain of being .
his system had eleven grades , arranged according " to the degree to which they are infected with potentiality ", expressed in their form at birth .
the highest animals laid warm and wet creatures alive , the lowest bore theirs cold , dry , and in thick eggs .
for charles singer , " nothing is more remarkable than [ aristotle 's ] efforts to [ exhibit ] the relationships of living things as a " scala naturae "".
aristotle also held that the level of a creature 's perfection was reflected in its form , but not preordained by that form .
ideas like this , and his ideas about souls , are not regarded as science at all in modern times .
he placed emphasis on the type ( s ) of soul an organism possessed , asserting that plants possess a vegetative soul , responsible for reproduction and growth , animals a vegetative and a sensitive soul , responsible for mobility and sensation , and humans a vegetative , a sensitive , and a rational soul , capable of thought and reflection .
aristotle , in contrast to earlier philosophers , but in accordance with the egyptians , placed the rational soul in the heart , rather than the brain .
notable is aristotle 's division of sensation and thought , which generally went against previous philosophers , with the exception of alcmaeon .
aristotle 's successor at the lyceum , theophrastus , wrote a series of books on botany the " history of plants " which survived as the most important contribution of antiquity to botany , even into the middle ages .
many of theophrastus ' names survive into modern times , such as " carpos " for fruit , and " pericarpion " for seed vessel .
rather than focus on formal causes , as aristotle did , theophrastus suggested a mechanistic scheme , drawing analogies between natural and artificial processes , and relying on aristotle 's concept of the efficient cause .
theophrastus also recognized the role of sex in the reproduction of some higher plants , though this last discovery was lost in later ages .
after theophrastus , the lyceum failed to produce any original work .
though interest in aristotle 's ideas survived , they were generally taken unquestioningly .
it is not until the age of alexandria under the ptolemies that advances in biology can be again found .
the first medical teacher at alexandria , herophilus of chalcedon , corrected aristotle , placing intelligence in the brain , and connected the nervous system to motion and sensation .
herophilus also distinguished between veins and arteries , noting that the latter pulse while the former do not .
though a few ancient atomists such as lucretius challenged the teleological viewpoint of aristotelian ideas about life , teleology ( and after the rise of christianity , natural theology ) would remain central to biological thought essentially until the 10th and 10th centuries .
ernst mayr claimed that there was " nothing of any real consequence in biology after lucretius and galen until the renaissance ."
aristotle 's ideas of natural history and medicine survived , but they were generally taken unquestioningly .
aristotle 's psychology , given in his treatise " on the soul " (" peri psyche ", often known by its latin title " de anima "), posits three kinds of soul (" psyches "): the vegetative soul , the sensitive soul , and the rational soul .
humans have a rational soul .
this kind of soul is capable of the same powers as the other kinds : like the vegetative soul it can grow and nourish itself ; like the sensitive soul it can experience sensations and move locally .
the unique part of the human , rational soul is its ability to receive forms of other things and compare them .
for aristotle , the soul (" psyche ") was a simpler concept than it is for us today .
by soul he simply meant the form of a living being .
because all beings are composites of form and matter , the form of living beings is that which endows them with what is specific to living beings , e . g .
the ability to initiate movement ( or in the case of plants , growth and chemical transformations , which aristotle considers types of movement ).
according to aristotle , memory is the ability to hold a perceived experience in your mind and to have the ability to distinguish between the internal " appearance " and an occurrence in the past .
in other words , a memory is a mental picture ( phantasm ) in which aristotle defines in " de anima ", as an appearance which is imprinted on the part of the body that forms a memory .
aristotle believed an " imprint " becomes impressed on a semi-fluid bodily organ that undergoes several changes in order to make a memory .
a memory occurs when a stimuli is too complex that the nervous system ( semi-fluid bodily organ ) cannot receive all the impressions at once .
these changes are the same as those involved in the operations of sensation , common sense , and thinking .
the mental picture imprinted on the bodily organ is the final product of the entire process of sense perception .
it does not matter if the experience was seen or heard , every experience ends up as a mental image in memory aristotle uses the word " memory " for two basic abilities .
first , the actual retaining of the experience in the mnemonic " imprint " that can develop from sensation .
second , the intellectual anxiety that comes with the " imprint " due to being impressed at a particular time and processing specific contents .
these abilities can be explained as memory is neither sensation nor thinking because is arises only after a lapse of time .
therefore , memory is of the past , prediction is of the future , and sensation is of the present .
the retrieval of our " imprints " cannot be performed suddenly .
a transitional channel is needed and located in our past experiences , both for our previous experience and present experience .
aristotle proposed that slow-witted people have good memory because the fluids in their brain do not wash away their memory organ used to imprint experiences and so the " imprint " can easily continue .
however , they cannot be too slow or the hardened surface of the organ will not receive new " imprints ".
he believed the young and the old do not properly develop an " imprint ".
young people undergo rapid changes as they develop , while the elderly 's organs are beginning to decay , thus stunting new " imprints ".
likewise , people who are too quick-witted are similar to the young and the image cannot be fixed because of the rapid changes of their organ .
because intellectual functions are not involved in memory , memories belong to some animals too , but only those in which have perception of time .
because aristotle believes people receive all kinds of sense perceptions and people perceive them as images or " imprints ", people are continually weaving together new " imprints " of things they experience .
in order to search for these " imprints ", people search the memory itself .
within the memory , if one experience is offered instead of a specific memory , that person will reject this experience until they find what they are looking for .
recollection occurs when one experience naturally follows another .
if the chain of " images " is needed , one memory will stimulate the other .
if the chain of " images " is not needed , but expected , then it will only stimulate the other memory in most instances .
when people recall experiences , they stimulate certain previous experiences until they have stimulated the one that was needed .
recollection is the self-directed activity of retrieving the information stored in a memory " imprint " after some time has passed .
retrieval of stored information is dependent on the scope of mnemonic capabilities of a being ( human or animal ) and the abilities the human or animal possesses .
only humans will remember " imprints " of intellectual activity , such as numbers and words .
animals that have perception of time will be able to retrieve memories of their past observations .
remembering involves only perception of the things remembered and of the time passed .
recollection of an " imprint " is when the present experiences a person remembers are similar with elements corresponding in character and arrangement of past sensory experiences .
when an " imprint " is recalled , it may bring forth a large group of related " imprints ".
aristotle believed the chain of thought , which ends in recollection of certain " imprints ", was connected systematically in three sorts of relationships : similarity , contrast , and contiguity .
these three laws make up his laws of association .
aristotle believed that past experiences are hidden within our mind .
a force operates to awaken the hidden material to bring up the actual experience .
according to aristotle , association is the power innate in a mental state , which operates upon the unexpressed remains of former experiences , allowing them to rise and be recalled .
before understanding aristotle 's views on dreams , first his idea of sleep must be examined .
aristotle gives an account of his explanation of sleep in " on sleep and wakefulness ".
sleep takes place as a result of overuse of the senses or of digestion , so it is vital to the body , including the senses , so it can be revitalized .
while a person is asleep , the critical activities , which include thinking , sensing , recalling and remembering , do not function as they do during wakefulness .
since a person cannot sense during sleep they can also not have a desire , which is the result of a sensation .
however , the senses are able to work during sleep , albeit differently than when a person is awake because during sleep a person can still have sensory experiences .
also , not all of the senses are inactive during sleep , only the ones that are weary .
dreams do not involve actually sensing a stimulus because , as discussed , the senses do not work as they normally do during sleep .
in dreams , sensation is still involved , but in an altered manner than when awake .
aristotle explains the phenomenon that occurs when a person stares at a moving stimulus such as the waves in a body of water .
when they look away from that stimulus , the next thing they look at appears to be moving in a wave like motion .
when a person perceives a stimulus and the stimulus is no longer the focus of their attention , it leaves an impression .
when the body is awake and the senses are functioning properly , a person constantly encounters new stimuli to sense and so the impressions left from previously perceived stimuli become irrelevant .
however , during sleep the impressions stimuli made throughout the day become noticed because there are not new sensory experiences to distract from these impressions that were made .
so , dreams result from these lasting impressions .
since impressions are all that are left and not the exact stimuli , dreams will not resemble the actual experience that occurred when awake .
during sleep , a person is in an altered state of mind .
aristotle compares a sleeping person to a person who is overtaken by strong feelings toward a stimulus .
for example , a person who has a strong infatuation with someone may begin to think they see that person everywhere because they are so overtaken by their feelings .
when a person is asleep , their senses are not acting as they do when they are awake and this results in them thinking like a person who is influenced by strong feelings .
since a person sleeping is in this suggestible state , they become easily deceived by what appears in their dreams .
when asleep , a person is unable to make judgments as they do when they are awake due to the senses not functioning normally during sleep , they are unable to help a person judge what is happening in their dream .
this in turn leads the person to believe the dream is real .
dreams may be absurd in nature but the senses are not able to discern whether they are real or not .
so , the dreamer is left to accept the dream because they lack the choice to judge it .
one component of aristotle 's theory of dreams introduces ideas that are contradictory to previously held beliefs .
he claimed that dreams are not foretelling and that they are not sent by a divine being .
aristotle reasoned that instances in which dreams do resemble future events are happenstances not divinations .
these ideas were contradictory to what had been believed about dreams , but at the time in which he introduced these ideas more thinkers were beginning to give naturalistic as opposed to supernatural explanations to phenomena .
aristotle also includes in his theory of dreams what constitutes a dream and what does not .
he claimed that a dream is first established by the fact that the person is asleep when they experience it .
if a person had an image appear for a moment after waking up or if they see something in the dark it is not considered a dream because they were awake when it occurred .
secondly , any sensory experience that actually occurs while a person is asleep and is perceived by the person while asleep does not qualify as part of a dream .
for example , if , while a person is sleeping , a door shuts and in their dream they hear a door is shut , aristotle argues that this sensory experience is not part of the dream .
the actual sensory experience is perceived by the senses , the fact that it occurred while the person was asleep does not make it part of the dream .
lastly , the images of dreams must be a result of lasting impressions of sensory experiences had when awake .
aristotle considered ethics to be a practical rather than theoretical study , i . e ., one aimed at becoming good and doing good rather than knowing for its own sake .
he wrote several treatises on ethics , including most notably , the " nicomachean ethics ".
aristotle taught that virtue has to do with the proper function (" ergon ") of a thing .
an eye is only a good eye in so much as it can see , because the proper function of an eye is sight .
aristotle reasoned that humans must have a function specific to humans , and that this function must be an activity of the " psuch " ( normally translated as " soul ") in accordance with reason (" logos ").
aristotle identified such an optimum activity of the soul as the aim of all human deliberate action , " eudaimonia ", generally translated as " happiness " or sometimes " well being ".
to have the potential of ever being happy in this way necessarily requires a good character (" thik " " aret "), often translated as moral ( or ethical ) virtue ( or excellence ).
aristotle taught that to achieve a virtuous and potentially happy character requires a first stage of having the fortune to be habituated not deliberately , but by teachers , and experience , leading to a later stage in which one consciously chooses to do the best things .
when the best people come to live life this way their practical wisdom (" phronesis ") and their intellect (" nous ") can develop with each other towards the highest possible human virtue , the wisdom of an accomplished theoretical or speculative thinker , or in other words , a philosopher .
in addition to his works on ethics , which address the individual , aristotle addressed the city in his work titled " politics ".
aristotle considered the city to be a natural community .
moreover , he considered the city to be prior in importance to the family which in turn is prior to the individual , " for the whole must of necessity be prior to the part ".
he also famously stated that " man is by nature a political animal " and also arguing that humanity 's defining factor among others in the animal kingdom is its rationality .
aristotle conceived of politics as being like an organism rather than like a machine , and as a collection of parts none of which can exist without the others .
aristotle 's conception of the city is organic , and he is considered one of the first to conceive of the city in this manner .
the common modern understanding of a political community as a modern state is quite different from aristotle 's understanding .
although he was aware of the existence and potential of larger empires , the natural community according to aristotle was the city (" polis ") which functions as a political " community " or " partnership " (" koinnia ").
the aim of the city is not just to avoid injustice or for economic stability , but rather to allow at least some citizens the possibility to live a good life , and to perform beautiful acts : " the political partnership must be regarded , therefore , as being for the sake of noble actions , not for the sake of living together ."
this is distinguished from modern approaches , beginning with social contract theory , according to which individuals leave the state of nature because of " fear of violent death " or its " inconveniences ."
excerpt from a speech by the character ' aristotle ' in the book protrepticus ( hutchinson and johnson , 2000 p . 20 )
aristotle considered epic poetry , tragedy , comedy , dithyrambic poetry and music to be imitative , each varying in imitation by medium , object , and manner .
for example , music imitates with the media of rhythm and harmony , whereas dance imitates with rhythm alone , and poetry with language .
the forms also differ in their object of imitation .
comedy , for instance , is a dramatic imitation of men worse than average ; whereas tragedy imitates men slightly better than average .
lastly , the forms differ in their manner of imitation through narrative or character , through change or no change , and through drama or no drama .
aristotle believed that imitation is natural to mankind and constitutes one of mankind 's advantages over animals .
while it is believed that aristotle 's " poetics " comprised two books one on comedy and one on tragedy only the portion that focuses on tragedy has survived .
aristotle taught that tragedy is composed of six elements : plot-structure , character , style , thought , spectacle , and lyric poetry .
the characters in a tragedy are merely a means of driving the story ; and the plot , not the characters , is the chief focus of tragedy .
tragedy is the imitation of action arousing pity and fear , and is meant to effect the catharsis of those same emotions .
aristotle concludes " poetics " with a discussion on which , if either , is superior : epic or tragic mimesis .
he suggests that because tragedy possesses all the attributes of an epic , possibly possesses additional attributes such as spectacle and music , is more unified , and achieves the aim of its mimesis in shorter scope , it can be considered superior to epic .
aristotle was a keen systematic collector of riddles , folklore , and proverbs ; he and his school had a special interest in the riddles of the delphic oracle and studied the fables of aesop .
aristotle 's analysis of procreation describes an active , ensouling masculine element bringing life to an inert , passive female element .
on this ground , feminist metaphysics have accused aristotle of misogyny and sexism .
however , aristotle gave equal weight to women 's happiness as he did to men 's , and commented in his " rhetoric " that the things that lead to happiness need to be in women as well as men .
aristotle wrote his works on papyrus scrolls , or rolls , which was the common writing medium of that era .
modern scholarship reveals that aristotle 's " lost " works stray considerably in characterization from the surviving aristotelian corpus .
whereas the lost works appear to have been originally written with an intent for subsequent publication , the surviving works do not appear to have been so .
rather the surviving works mostly resemble lecture notes unintended for publication .
the authenticity of a portion of the surviving works as originally aristotelian is also today held suspect , with some books duplicating or summarizing each other , the authorship of one book questioned and another book considered to be unlikely aristotle 's at all .
some of the individual works within the corpus , including the " constitution of athens ," are regarded by most scholars as products of aristotle 's " school ," perhaps compiled under his direction or supervision .
others , such as " on colors ," may have been produced by aristotle 's successors at the lyceum , e . g ., theophrastus and straton .
still others acquired aristotle 's name through similarities in doctrine or content , such as the " de plantis ," possibly by nicolaus of damascus .
other works in the corpus include medieval palmistries and astrological and magical texts whose connections to aristotle are purely fanciful and self-promotional .
according to a distinction that originates with aristotle himself , his writings are divisible into two groups : the " exoteric " and the " esoteric ".
most scholars have understood this as a distinction between works aristotle intended for the public ( exoteric ), and the more technical works intended for use within the lyceum course / school ( esoteric ).
modern scholars commonly assume these latter to be aristotle 's own ( unpolished ) lecture notes ( or in some cases possible notes by his students ).
however , one classic scholar offers an alternative interpretation .
the 5th century neoplatonist ammonius hermiae writes that aristotle 's writing style is deliberately obscurantist so that " good people may for that reason stretch their mind even more , whereas empty minds that are lost through carelessness will be put to flight by the obscurity when they encounter sentences like these ."
another common assumption is that none of the exoteric works is extant that all of aristotle 's extant writings are of the esoteric kind .
current knowledge of what exactly the exoteric writings were like is scant and dubious , though many of them may have been in dialogue form .
(" fragments " of some of aristotle 's dialogues have survived .)
perhaps it is to these that cicero refers when he characterized aristotle 's writing style as " a river of gold "; it is hard for many modern readers to accept that one could seriously so admire the style of those works currently available to us .
however , some modern scholars have warned that we cannot know for certain that cicero 's praise was reserved specifically for the exoteric works ; a few modern scholars have actually admired the concise writing style found in aristotle 's extant works .
one major question in the history of aristotle 's works , then , is how were the exoteric writings all lost , and how did the ones we now possess come to us .
the story of the original manuscripts of the esoteric treatises is described by strabo in his " geography " and plutarch in his " parallel lives ".
the manuscripts were left from aristotle to his successor theophrastus , who in turn willed them to neleus of scepsis .
neleus supposedly took the writings from athens to scepsis , where his heirs let them languish in a cellar until the 1st century bc , when apellicon of teos discovered and purchased the manuscripts , bringing them back to athens .
according to the story , apellicon tried to repair some of the damage that was done during the manuscripts ' stay in the basement , introducing a number of errors into the text .
when lucius cornelius sulla occupied athens in 80 bc , he carried off the library of apellicon to rome , where they were first published in 60 bc by the grammarian tyrannion of amisus and then by the philosopher andronicus of rhodes .
carnes lord attributes the popular belief in this story to the fact that it provides " the most plausible explanation for the rapid eclipse of the peripatetic school after the middle of the third century , and for the absence of widespread knowledge of the specialized treatises of aristotle throughout the hellenistic period , as well as for the sudden reappearance of a flourishing aristotelianism during the first century b . c ."
lord voices a number of reservations concerning this story , however .
first , the condition of the texts is far too good for them to have suffered considerable damage followed by apellicon 's inexpert attempt at repair .
second , there is " incontrovertible evidence ," lord says , that the treatises were in circulation during the time in which strabo and plutarch suggest they were confined within the cellar in scepsis .
third , the definitive edition of aristotle 's texts seems to have been made in athens some fifty years before andronicus supposedly compiled his .
and fourth , ancient library catalogues predating andronicus ' intervention list an aristotelian corpus quite similar to the one we currently possess .
lord sees a number of post-aristotelian interpolations in the " politics ", for example , but is generally confident that the work has come down to us relatively intact .
on the one hand , the surviving texts of aristotle do not derive from finished literary texts , but rather from working drafts used within aristotle 's school , as opposed , on the other hand , to the dialogues and other " exoteric " texts which aristotle published more widely during his lifetime .
the consensus is that andronicus of rhodes collected the esoteric works of aristotle 's school which existed in the form of smaller , separate works , distinguished them from those of theophrastus and other peripatetics , edited them , and finally compiled them into the more cohesive , larger works as they are known today .
more than 2000 years after his death , aristotle remains one of the most influential people who ever lived .
he contributed to almost every field of human knowledge then in existence , and he was the founder of many new fields .
according to the philosopher bryan magee , " it is doubtful whether any human being has ever known as much as he did ".
among countless other achievements , aristotle was the founder of formal logic , pioneered the study of zoology , and left every future scientist and philosopher in his debt through his contributions to the scientific method .
despite these achievements , the influence of aristotle 's errors is considered by some to have held back science considerably .
bertrand russell notes that " almost every serious intellectual advance has had to begin with an attack on some aristotelian doctrine ".
russell also refers to aristotle 's ethics as " repulsive ", and calls his logic " as definitely antiquated as ptolemaic astronomy ".
russell notes that these errors make it difficult to do historical justice to aristotle , until one remembers how large of an advance he made upon all of his predecessors .
the immediate influence of aristotle 's work was felt as the lyceum grew into the peripatetic school .
aristotle 's notable students included aristoxenus , dicaearchus , demetrius of phalerum , eudemos of rhodes , harpalus , hephaestion , mnason of phocis , nicomachus , and theophrastus .
aristotle 's influence over alexander the great is seen in the latter 's bringing with him on his expedition a host of zoologists , botanists , and researchers .
he had also learned a great deal about persian customs and traditions from his teacher .
although his respect for aristotle was diminished as his travels made it clear that much of aristotle 's geography was clearly wrong , when the old philosopher released his works to the public , alexander complained " thou hast not done well to publish thy acroamatic doctrines ; for in what shall i surpass other men if those doctrines wherein i have been trained are to be all men 's common property ?"
greek christian scribes played a crucial role in the preservation of aristotle by copying all the extant greek language manuscripts of the corpus .
the first greek christians to comment extensively on aristotle were john philoponus , elias , and david in the sixth century , and stephen of alexandria in the early seventh century .
john philoponus stands out for having attempted a fundamental critique of aristotle 's views on the eternity of the world , movement , and other elements of aristotelian thought .
after a hiatus of several centuries , formal commentary by eustratius and michael of ephesus reappears in the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries , apparently sponsored by anna comnena .
aristotle was one of the most revered western thinkers in early islamic theology .
most of the still extant works of aristotle , as well as a number of the original greek commentaries , were translated into arabic and studied by muslim philosophers , scientists and scholars .
averroes , avicenna and alpharabius , who wrote on aristotle in great depth , also influenced thomas aquinas and other western christian scholastic philosophers .
alkindus considered aristotle as the outstanding and unique representative of philosophy and averroes spoke of aristotle as the " exemplar " for all future philosophers .
medieval muslim scholars regularly described aristotle as the " first teacher ".
the title " teacher " was first given to aristotle by muslim scholars , and was later used by western philosophers ( as in the famous poem of dante ) who were influenced by the tradition of islamic philosophy .
in accordance with the greek theorists , the muslims considered aristotle to be a dogmatic philosopher , the author of a closed system , and believed that aristotle shared with plato essential tenets of thought .
some went so far as to credit aristotle himself with neo-platonic metaphysical ideas .
with the loss of the study of ancient greek in the early medieval latin west , aristotle was practically unknown there from c . ad 600 to c . 1000 except through the latin translation of the " organon " made by boethius .
in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries , interest in aristotle revived and latin christians had translations made , both from arabic translations , such as those by gerard of cremona , and from the original greek , such as those by james of venice and william of moerbeke .
after thomas aquinas wrote his theology , working from moerbeke 's translations , the demand for aristotle 's writings grew and the greek manuscripts returned to the west , stimulating a revival of aristotelianism in europe that continued into the renaissance .
aristotle is referred to as " the philosopher " by scholastic thinkers such as thomas aquinas ( see " summa theologica ", part i , question 3 , etc .).
these thinkers blended aristotelian philosophy with christianity , bringing the thought of ancient greece into the middle ages .
it required a repudiation of some aristotelian principles for the sciences and the arts to free themselves for the discovery of modern scientific laws and empirical methods .
the medieval english poet chaucer describes his student as being happy by having an american in paris
an american in paris is a jazz-influenced orchestral piece by the american composer george gershwin , written in 1000 .
inspired by the time gershwin had spent in paris , it evokes the sights and energy of the french capital in the 1000s and is one of his best-known compositions .
gershwin composed " an american in paris " on commission from the conductor walter damrosch .
he scored the piece for the standard instruments of the symphony orchestra plus celesta , saxophones , and automobile horns .
he brought back some parisian taxi horns for the new york premiere of the composition , which took place on december10 , 1000 , in carnegie hall , with damrosch conducting the new york philharmonic .
gershwin completed the orchestration on november 10 , less than four weeks before the work 's premiere .
gershwin collaborated on the original program notes with the critic and composer deems taylor , noting that : " my purpose here is to portray the impression of an american visitor in paris as he strolls about the city and listens to various street noises and absorbs the french atmosphere ."
when the tone poem moves into the blues , " our american friend ... has succumbed to a spasm of homesickness ."
but , " nostalgia is not a fatal disease ."
the american visitor " once again is an alert spectator of parisian life " and " the street noises and french atmosphere are triumphant ."
gershwin was attracted by maurice ravel 's unusual chords .
upon gershwin 's request , ravel accepted him as a student , and gershwin went on his first trip to paris in 1000 ready to study .
after his initial student audition with ravel turned into a sharing of musical theories , ravel said he couldn ' t teach him but he would send a letter referring him to nadia boulanger .
while the studies were cut short , that 1000 trip resulted in the initial version of an american in paris written as a ' thank you note ' to gershwin 's hosts , robert and mabel shirmer .
gershwin called it " a rhapsodic ballet "; it is written freely and in a much more modern idiom than his prior works .
gershwin strongly encouraged ravel to come to the united states for a tour .
to this end , upon his return to new york , gershwin joined the efforts of ravel 's friend robert schmitz , a pianist ravel had met during the war , to urge ravel to tour the u . s . schmitz was the head of pro musica , promoting franco-american musical relations , and was able to offer ravel a $ 10 , 000 fee for the tour , an enticement gershwin knew would be important to ravel .
gershwin greeted ravel in new york in february 1000 at the start of ravel 's u . s . tour , and joined ravel again later in the tour in los angeles .
after a lunch together with chaplin in beverly hills , ravel was persuaded to perform an unscheduled ' house concert ' in a friend 's music salon , performing among kindred spirits .
ravel 's tour reignited gershwin 's desire to return to paris which he did in march 1000 .
ravel 's high praise of gershwin in an introductory letter to boulanger caused gershwin to seriously consider taking much more time to study abroad in paris .
yet after playing for her , she told him she could not teach him .
nadia boulanger gave gershwin basically the same advice she gave all of her accomplished master students " don ' t copy others ; be yourself ."
in this case " why try to be a second rate ravel when you are already a first rate gershwin ?"
this did not set gershwin back , as his real intent abroad was to complete a new work based on paris and perhaps a second rhapsody for piano and orchestra to follow his " rhapsody in blue ".
paris at this time hosted many expatriate writers : among them ezra pound , w . b . yeats , ernest hemingway ; and artist pablo picasso .
gershwin based " an american in paris " on a melodic fragment called " very parisienne ", written in 1000 on his first visit to paris as a gift to his hosts , robert and mabel schirmer .
he described the piece as a " rhapsodic ballet " because it was written freely and is more modern than his previous works .
gershwin explained in " musical america ", " my purpose here is to portray the impressions of an american visitor in paris as he strolls about the city , listens to the various street noises , and absorbs the french atmosphere ."
the piece is structured into five sections , which culminate in a loose aba format .
gershwin 's first a episode introduces the two main " walking " themes in the " allegretto grazioso " and develops a third theme in the " subito con brio ".
the style of this a section is written in the typical french style of composers claude debussy and les six .
this a section featured duple meter , singsong rhythms , and diatonic melodies with the sounds of oboe , english horn , and taxi horns .
the b section 's " andante ma con ritmo deciso " introduces the american blues and spasms of homesickness .
the " allegro " that follows continues to express homesickness in a faster twelve-bar blues .
in the b section , gershwin uses common time , syncopated rhythms , and bluesy melodies with the sounds of trumpet , saxophone , and snare drum .
" moderato con grazia " is the last a section that returns to the themes set in a .
after recapitulating the " walking " themes , gershwin overlays the slow blues theme from section b in the final grandioso .
" an american in paris " is scored for 3 flutes ( 3rd doubling on piccolo ), 2 oboes , english horn , 2 clarinets in b-flat , bass clarinet in b-flat , 2 bassoons , 4 horns in f , 3 trumpets in b-flat , 3 trombones , tuba , timpani , snare drum , bass drum , triangle , wood block , cymbals , low and high tom-toms , xylophone , glockenspiel , celesta , 4 taxi horns labeled as a , b , c and d with circles around them , alto saxophone/soprano saxophone , tenor saxophone/soprano saxophone/alto saxophone , baritone saxophone/soprano saxophone/alto saxophone , and strings .
although most modern audiences have heard the taxi horns using the notes a , b , c and d , it has recently come to light that gershwin 's intention was to have used the notes a , b , d , and a .
it is likely that in labeling the taxi horns as a , b , c and d with circles , he may have been referring to the use of the four different horns and not the notes that they played .
the revised edition by f . campbell-watson calls for three saxophones , alto , tenor and baritone .
in this arrangement the soprano and alto doublings have been rewritten to avoid changing instruments .
in 2000 gershwin specialist jack gibbons made his own restoration of the original orchestration of an american in paris , working directly from gershwin 's original manuscript , including the restoration of gershwin 's soprano saxophone parts removed in f . campbell-watson 's revision ; gibbons ' restored orchestration of an american in paris was performed at london 's queen elizabeth hall on july 9 , 2000 by the city of oxford orchestra conducted by levon parikian
william daly arranged the score for piano solo which was published by new world music in 1000 .
gershwin did not particularly like walter damrosch 's interpretation at the world premiere of " an american in paris ".
he stated that damrosch 's sluggish , dragging tempo caused him to walk out of the hall during a matinee performance of this work .
the audience , according to edward cushing , responded with " a demonstration of enthusiasm impressively genuine in contrast to the conventional applause which new music , good and bad , ordinarily arouses ."
critics believed that " an american in paris " was better crafted than his lukewarm concerto in f . some did not think it belonged in a program with classical composers csar franck , richard wagner , or guillaume lekeu on its premiere .
gershwin responded to the critics , " it 's not a beethoven symphony , you know ...
it 's a humorous piece , nothing solemn about it .
it 's not intended to draw tears .
if it pleases symphony audiences as a light , jolly piece , a series of impressions musically expressed , it succeeds ."
on september 20 , 2000 , it was announced that a musicological critical edition of the full orchestral score will be eventually released .
the gershwin family , working in conjunction with the library of congress and the university of michigan , are working to make scores available to the public that represent gershwin 's true intent .
it is unknown if the critical score will include the four minutes of material gershwin later deleted from the work ( such as the restatement of the blues theme after the faster 10 bar blues section ), or if the score will document changes in the orchestration during gershwin 's composition process .
the score to " an american in paris " is currently scheduled to be issued first in a series of scores to be released .
the entire project may take 30 to 40 years to complete , but " an american in paris " will be an early volume in the series .
two urtext editions of the work have been published by the german publisher b-note music in 2000 .
the changes made by campbell-watson have been withdrawn in both editions .
in the extended urtext , 100 bars of music have been re-integrated .
conductor walter damrosch had cut them shortly before the first performance .
" an american in paris " has been frequently recorded .
the first recording was made for rca victor in 1000 with nathaniel shilkret conducting the rca victor symphony orchestra , drawn from members of the philadelphia orchestra .
gershwin was on hand to " supervise " the recording ; however , shilkret was reported to be in charge and eventually asked the composer to leave the recording studio .
then , a little later , shilkret discovered there was no one to play the brief celesta solo during the slow section , so he hastily asked gershwin if he might play the solo ; gershwin said he could and so he briefly participated in the actual recording .
this recording is believed to use the taxi horns in the way that gershwin had intended using the notes a flat , b flat , a higher c and a lower d . the radio broadcast of the september8 , 1000 hollywood bowl george gershwin memorial concert , in which " an american in paris ," also conducted by shilkret , was second on the program , was recorded and was released in 1000 in a two-cd set .
arthur fiedler and the boston pops orchestra recorded the work for rca victor , including one of the first stereo recordings of the music .
in 1000 , arturo toscanini conducting the nbc symphony orchestra recorded the piece for rca victor , one of the few commercial recordings toscanini made of music by an american composer .
the seattle symphony also recorded a version in 1000 of gershwin 's original score , before he made numerous edits resulting in the score as we hear it today .
harry james released a version of the blues section on his 1000 album " one night stand ," recorded live at the aragon ballroom in chicago ( columbia gl 500 and cl 500 ).
conductor steven richman and harmonie ensemble , new york released a recording of gershwin 's original orchestrations in 2000 on harmonia mundi .
in 1000 , metro-goldwyn-mayer released the musical film " an american in paris ", featuring gene kelly and leslie caron .
winning the 1000 best picture oscar and numerous other awards , the film was directed by vincente minnelli , featured many tunes of gershwin , and concluded with an extensive , elaborate dance sequence built around the " an american in paris " symphonic poem ( arranged for the film by johnny green ), costing $ 500 , 000 .
academy award for best production design
the academy award for best production design recognizes achievement for art direction in film .
the category 's original name was best art direction , but was changed to its current name in 2000 for the 80th academy awards .
this change resulted from the art director 's branch of the academy of motion picture arts and sciences ( ampas ) being renamed the designer 's branch .
since 1000 , the award is shared with the set decorator ( s ).
it is awarded to the best interior design in a film .
the films below are listed with their production year ( for example , the 2000 academy award for best art direction is given to a film from 1000 ).
in the lists below , the winner of the award for each year is shown first , followed by the other nominees .
academy awards
the academy awards , now known officially as the oscars , is a set of twenty-four awards for artistic and technical merit in the american film industry , given annually by the academy of motion picture arts and sciences ( ampas ), to recognize excellence in cinematic achievements as assessed by the academy 's voting membership .
the various category winners are awarded a copy of a golden statuette , officially called the " academy award of merit ", which has become commonly known by its nickname " oscar ".
the awards , first presented in 1000 at the hollywood roosevelt hotel , are overseen by ampas .
the awards ceremony was first broadcast on radio in 1000 and televised for the first time in 1000 .
it is now seen live in more than 200 countries and can be streamed live online .
the academy awards ceremony is the oldest worldwide entertainment awards ceremony .
its equivalents the emmy awards for television , the tony awards for theater , and the grammy awards for music and recording are modeled after the academy awards .
the 80th academy awards ceremony , honoring the best films of 2000 , were held on february 20 , 2000 , at the dolby theatre , in los angeles , california .
the ceremony was hosted by jimmy kimmel and was broadcast on abc .
a total of 3 , 040 oscars have been awarded from the inception of the award through the 80th .
the first academy awards presentation was held on may 10 , 1000 , at a private dinner function at the hollywood roosevelt hotel with an audience of about 200 people .
the post-awards party was held at the mayfair hotel .
the cost of guest tickets for that night 's ceremony was $ 5 ($ in dollars ).
fifteen statuettes were awarded , honoring artists , directors and other participants in the film-making industry of the time , for their works during the 100000 period .
the ceremony ran for 10minutes .
winners were announced to media three months earlier .
that was changed for the second ceremony in 1000 .
since then , for the rest of the first decade , the results were given to newspapers for publication at 10:00pm on the night of the awards .
this method was used until an occasion when the " los angeles times " announced the winners before the ceremony began ; as a result , the academy has , since 1000 , used a sealed envelope to reveal the name of the winners .
the first best actor awarded was emil jannings , for his performances in " the last command " and " the way of all flesh ".
he had to return to europe before the ceremony , so the academy agreed to give him the prize earlier ; this made him the first academy award winner in history .
at that time , the winners were recognized for all of their work done in a certain category during the qualifying period ; for example , jannings received the award for two movies in which he starred during that period , and janet gaynor later won a single oscar for performances in three films .
with the fourth ceremony , however , the system changed , and professionals were honored for a specific performance in a single film .
for the first six ceremonies , the eligibility period spanned two calendar years .
at the 20th ceremony , held on march 20 , 1000 , the best foreign language film category was introduced .
until then , foreign-language films had been honored with the special achievement award .
the 70th academy awards , held in 2000 , presented the first academy award for best animated feature .
since 1000 , all academy awards ceremonies have ended with the academy award for best picture .
traditionally , the actors present the awards for actresses , and the actresses present the awards for actors .
in addition to the academy award of merit ( oscar award ), there are nine honorary ( non-competitive ) awards presented by the academy from time to time ( except for the academy honorary award , the technical achievement award , and the student academy awards , which are presented annually ):
the academy also awards nicholl fellowships in screenwriting .
the best known award is the academy award of merit , more popularly known as the oscar statuette .
made of gold-plated britannium on a black metal base , it is 10 . 5in ( 30 . 3cm ) tall , weighs 8 . 5lb ( 3 . 800kg ), and depicts a knight rendered in art deco style holding a crusader 's sword standing on a reel of film with five spokes .
the five spokes represent the original branches of the academy : actors , writers , directors , producers , and technicians .
the model for the statuette is said to be mexican actor emilio " el indio " fernndez .
sculptor george stanley ( who also did the muse fountain at the hollywood bowl ) sculpted cedric gibbons ' design .
the statuettes presented at the initial ceremonies were gold-plated solid bronze .
within a few years the bronze was abandoned in favor of britannia metal , a pewter-like alloy which is then plated in copper , nickel silver , and finally , 20-karat gold .
due to a metal shortage during world war ii , oscars were made of painted plaster for three years .
following the war , the academy invited recipients to redeem the plaster figures for gold-plated metal ones .
the only addition to the oscar since it was created is a minor streamlining of the base .
the original oscar mold was cast in 1000 at the c . w .
shumway & sons foundry in batavia , illinois , which also contributed to casting the molds for the vince lombardi trophy and emmy award 's statuettes .
from 1000 to 2000 , approximately 50 oscars were made each year in chicago by illinois manufacturer r . s .
owens & company .
it takes between three and four weeks to manufacture 50 statuettes .
in 2000 , the academy returned to bronze as the core metal of the statuettes , handing manufacturing duties to rock tavern , new york-based polich tallix fine art foundry .
while based on a digital scan of an original 1000 oscar , the new statuettes will retain their modern-era dimensions and black pedestal .
cast in liquid bronze from 3d-printed ceramic molds and polished , they are then electroplated in 20-karat gold by brooklyn , new yorkbased epner technology .
the time required to produce 50 such statuettes is roughly 3 months .
r . s .
owens is expected to continue producing other awards for the academy and service existing oscars .
the origin of the name " oscar " is disputed .
one biography of bette davis , who was a president of the academy , claims that she named the oscar after her first husband , band leader harmon oscar nelson .
another claimed origin is that the academy 's executive secretary , margaret herrick , first saw the award in 1000 and made reference to the statuette 's reminding her of her " uncle oscar " ( a nickname for her cousin oscar pierce ).
columnist sidney skolsky was present during herrick 's naming and seized the name in his byline , " employees have affectionately dubbed their famous statuette ' oscar '."
one of the earliest mentions of the term " oscar " dates back to a " time " magazine article about the 1000 6th academy awards .
walt disney is also quoted as thanking the academy for his oscar as early as 1000 .
the trophy was officially dubbed the " oscar " in 1000 by the academy of motion picture arts and sciences .
to prevent information identifying the oscar winners from leaking ahead of the ceremony , oscar statuettes presented at the ceremony have blank baseplates .
until 2000 , winners were expected to return the statuettes to the academy after the ceremony and wait several weeks to have inscriptions applied .
since 2000 , winners have had the option of having engraved nameplates applied to their statuettes at an inscription-processing station at the governor 's ball , a party held immediately after the oscar ceremony .
in 2000 , the r . s .
owens company made 100 engraved nameplates ahead of the ceremony , bearing the names of every potential winner .
the 100 or so nameplates for non-winning nominees were recycled afterwards .
since 1000 , the statuettes have been legally encumbered by the requirement that neither winners nor their heirs may sell the statuettes without first offering to sell them back to the academy for us $ 1 .
if a winner refuses to agree to this stipulation , then the academy keeps the statuette .
academy awards not protected by this agreement have been sold in public auctions and private deals for six-figure sums .
in december 2000 , orson welles ' 1000 oscar for " citizen kane " ( best original screenplay ) was put up for auction , after his heirs won a 2000 court decision contending that welles did not sign any agreement to return the statue to the academy .
on december 20 , 2000 , it sold in an online auction for us $ 800 , 500 .
in 1000 , harold russell needed money for his wife 's medical expenses .
in a controversial decision , he consigned his 1000 oscar for best supporting actor for " the best years of our lives " to herman darvick autograph auctions , and on august 6 , 1000 , in new york city , the oscar sold to a private collector for $ 60 , 500 .
since he won the award before 1000 , he was not required to offer it to the academy first .
russell defended his decision , saying , " i don ' t know why anybody would be critical .
my wife 's health is much more important than sentimental reasons .
the movie will be here , even if oscar isn ' t ."
harold russell is the only academy award-winning actor to ever sell an oscar .
{
while the oscar is owned by the recipient , it is essentially not on the open market .
michael todd 's grandson tried to sell todd 's oscar statuette to a movie prop collector in 1000 , but the academy won the legal battle by getting a permanent injunction .
although some oscar sales transactions have been successful , some buyers have subsequently returned the statuettes to the academy , which keeps them in its treasury .
since 2000 , academy award nomination results have been announced to the public in late january .
prior to that , the results were announced in early february .
the academy of motion picture arts and sciences ( ampas ), a professional honorary organization , maintains a voting membership of 5 , 700 .
academy membership is divided into different branches , with each representing a different discipline in film production .
actors constitute the largest voting bloc , numbering 1 , 300 members ( 20 percent ) of the academy 's composition .
votes have been certified by the auditing firm pricewaterhousecoopers ( and its predecessor price waterhouse ) for the past 80 annual awards ceremonies .
all ampas members must be invited to join by the board of governors , on behalf of academy branch executive committees .
membership eligibility may be achieved by a competitive nomination or a member may submit a name based on other significant contributions to the field of motion pictures .
new membership proposals are considered annually .
the academy does not publicly disclose its membership , although as recently as 2000 press releases have announced the names of those who have been invited to join .
the 2000 release also stated that it has just under 6 , 000 voting members .
while the membership had been growing , stricter policies have kept its size steady since then .
in 2000 , the results of a study conducted by the " los angeles times " were published describing the demographic breakdown of approximately 80 % of ampas ' voting membership .
of the 5 , 100 + active voters confirmed , 90 % were caucasian , 70 % were male , and 50 % were found to be over the age of 60 .
30 % of voting members are former nominees ( 10 %) and winners ( 10 %).
in may 2000 , the academy sent a letter advising its 6 , 000 or so voting members that an online system for oscar voting would be implemented in 2000 .
according to rules 2 and 3 of the official academy awards rules , a film must open in the previous calendar year , from midnight at the start of january 1 to midnight at the end of december 30 , in los angeles county , california , and play for seven consecutive days , to qualify ( except for the best foreign language film , best documentary feature , and best documentary short subject ).
the best foreign language film award does not require a u . s . release .
the best documentary feature award requires week-long releases in " both " los angeles county " and " new york city during the previous calendar year .
the best documentary short subject award has noticeably different eligibility rules from most other competitive awards .
first , the qualifying period for release does not coincide with a calendar year , instead covering a one-year period starting on september 1 and ending on the august 30 of the calendar year before the ceremony .
second , there are multiple methods of qualification .
the main method is a week-long theatrical release in " either " los angeles county " or " new york city during the eligibility period .
films also can qualify by winning specified awards at one of a number of competitive film festivals designated by the academy .
finally , a film that is selected as a gold , silver , or bronze medal winner in the documentary category of the immediately previous student academy awards is also eligible .
for example , the 2000 best picture winner , " the hurt locker ", was actually first released in 2000 , but did not qualify for the 2000 awards as it did not play its oscar-qualifying run in los angeles until mid-2000 , thus qualifying for the 2000 awards .
foreign films must include english subtitles , and each country can submit only one film per year .
rule 2 states that a film must be feature-length , defined as a minimum of 40minutes , except for short-subject awards , and it must exist either on a 30 mm or 70 mm film print or in 20frame/s or 40frame/s progressive scan digital cinema format with a minimum projector resolution of 2000 by 1000 pixels .
effective with the 90th academy awards , to be presented in 2000 , multi-part and limited series will be ineligible for the best documentary feature award .
this followed the win of "", an eight-hour presentation that was screened in a limited release before being broadcast in five parts on abc and espn , in that category in 2000 .
the academy 's announcement of the new rule made no direct mention of that film .
producers must submit an official screen credits online form before the deadline ; in case it is not submitted by the defined deadline , the film will be ineligible for academy awards in any year .
the form includes the production credits for all related categories .
then , each form is checked and put in a reminder list of eligible releases .
in late december ballots and copies of the reminder list of eligible releases are mailed to around 6 , 000 active members .
for most categories , members from each of the branches vote to determine the nominees only in their respective categories ( i . e .
only directors vote for directors , writers for writers , actors for actors , etc .).
in the special case of best picture , all voting members are eligible to select the nominees .
in all major categories , a variant of the single transferable vote is used , with each member casting a ballot with up to five nominees ( ten for best picture ) ranked preferentially .
in certain categories , including foreign film , documentary and animated feature film , nominees are selected by special screening committees made up of members from all branches .
in most categories the winner is selected from among the nominees by plurality voting of all members .
since 2000 , the best picture winner has been chosen by instant runoff voting .
since 2000 , re-weighted range voting has been used to select the nominees for the best visual effects .
film companies will spend as much as several million dollars on marketing to awards voters for a movie in the running for best picture , in attempts to improve chances of receiving oscars and other movie awards conferred in oscar season .
the academy enforces rules to limit overt campaigning by its members so as to try to eliminate excesses and prevent the process from becoming undignified .
it has an awards czar on staff who advises members on allowed practices and levies penalties on offenders .
for example , a producer of the 2000 best picture nominee " the hurt locker " was disqualified as a producer in the category when he contacted associates urging them to vote for his film and not another that was seen as the front-runner (" the hurt locker " eventually won ).
the major awards are presented at a live televised ceremony , most commonly in late february or early march following the relevant calendar year , and six weeks after the announcement of the nominees .
it is the culmination of the film awards season , which usually begins during november or december of the previous year .
this is an elaborate extravaganza , with the invited guests walking up the red carpet in the creations of the most prominent fashion designers of the day .
black tie dress is the most common outfit for men , although fashion may dictate not wearing a bow-tie , and musical performers sometimes do not adhere to this .
( the artists who recorded the nominees for best original song quite often perform those songs live at the awards ceremony , and the fact that they are performing is often used to promote the television broadcast .)
the academy awards is the only awards show that is televised live in all united states time zones ( excluding hawaii ; they aired live in alaska starting in 2000 for the first time since 1000 ), canada , the united kingdom , and gathers millions of viewers elsewhere throughout the world .
the oscars were first televised in 1000 by nbc , which continued to broadcast the event until 1000 , when abc took over , televising the festivities ( including the first color broadcast of the event in 1000 ) through 1000 , after which nbc resumed the broadcasts .
abc once again took over broadcast duties in 1000 , and has broadcast the oscars ever since ; its current contract with the academy runs through 2000 .
the academy has also produced condensed versions of the ceremony for broadcast in international markets ( especially those outside of the americas ) in more desirable local timeslots .
the ceremony was broadcast live internationally for the first time via satellite in 1000 , but only two south american countries , chile and brazil , purchased the rights to air the broadcast .
by that time , the television rights to the academy awards had been sold in 50 countries .
a decade later , the rights were already being sold to 60 countries , and by 1000 , the tv rights to the awards were licensed in 70 countries .
the ceremonies were moved up from late march or early april to late february or early march starting in 2000 to help disrupt and shorten the intense lobbying and ad campaigns associated with oscar season in the film industry .
another reason was because of the growing tv ratings success of the ncaa division i men 's basketball tournament , which would cut into the academy awards audience .
the earlier date is also to the advantage of abc , as it now usually occurs during the highly profitable and important february sweeps period .
some years , the ceremony is moved into early march in deference to the winter olympics .
another reason for the move to late february and early march is to avoid the awards ceremony occurring so close to the religious holidays of passover and easter , which for decades had been a grievance from members and the general public .
advertising is somewhat restricted , however , as traditionally no movie studios or competitors of official academy award sponsors may advertise during the telecast .
the awards show holds the distinction of having won the most emmys in history , with 40 wins and 100 nominations .
after many years of being held on mondays at 9:00pm eastern/6:00 p . m pacific , in 1000 the ceremonies were moved to sundays at 8:30pm eastern/5:30pm pacific .
the reasons given for the move were that more viewers would tune in on sundays , that los angeles rush-hour traffic jams could be avoided , and that an earlier start time would allow viewers on the east coast to go to bed earlier .
for many years the film industry had opposed a sunday broadcast because it would cut into the weekend box office .
the academy has contemplated moving the ceremony even further back into january , citing tv viewers ' fatigue with the film industry 's long awards season .
however , such an accelerated schedule would dramatically decrease the voting period for its members , to the point where some voters would only have time to view the contending films streamed on their computers ( as opposed to traditionally receiving the films and ballots in the mail ).
also , a january or early-february ceremony held on a sunday would have to compete with national football league playoff games such as the super bowl .
originally scheduled for april 8 , 1000 , the 40th academy awards ceremony was postponed for two days , because of the assassination of dr . martin luther king , jr .. on march 30 , 1000 , the 50rd academy awards was postponed for one day , after the shooting of president ronald reagan and others in washington , d . c .
in 1000 , an " in memoriam " segment was introduced , honoring those who had made a significant contribution to cinema who had died in the preceding 10 months , a selection compiled by a small committee of academy members .
this segment has drawn criticism over the years for the omission of some names .
criticism was also levied for many years regarding another aspect , with the segment having a " popularity contest " feel as the audience varied their applause to those who had died by the subject 's cultural impact ; the applause has since been muted during the telecast , and the audience is discouraged from clapping during the segment and giving silent reflection instead .
in terms of broadcast length , the ceremony generally averages three and a half hours .
the first oscars , in 1000 , lasted 10minutes .
at the other end of the spectrum , the 2000 ceremony lasted four hours and twenty-three minutes .
in 2000 , the organizers of the academy awards announced that winners ' acceptance speeches must not run past 40seconds .
this , according to organizer bill mechanic , was to ensure the elimination of what he termed " the single most hated thing on the show " overly long and embarrassing displays of emotion .
in 2000 , in a further effort to streamline speeches , winners ' dedications were displayed on an on-screen ticker .
although still dominant in ratings , the viewership of the academy awards have steadily dropped ; the 80th academy awards were the lowest-rated in the past eight years ( although with increases in male and 10-40 viewership ), while the show itself also faced mixed reception .
following the show , " variety " reported that abc was , in negotiating an extension to its contract to broadcast the oscars , seeking to have more creative control over the broadcast itself .
currently and nominally , ampas is responsible for most aspects of the telecast , including the choice of production staff and hosting , although abc is allowed to have some input on their decisions .
in august 2000 , ampas extended its contract with abc through 2000 : the contract does not contain any notable changes , nor gives abc any further creative control over the telecast .
historically , the " oscarcast " has pulled in a bigger haul when box-office hits are favored to win the best picture trophy .
more than 50 . 20 million viewers tuned to the telecast for the 70th academy awards in 1000 , the year of " titanic ", which generated close to us $ 600 million at the north american box office pre-oscars .
the 70th academy awards ceremony in which "" ( pre-telecast box office earnings of us $ 300 million ) received 10 awards including best picture drew 40 . 50 million viewers .
the most watched ceremony based on nielsen ratings to date , however , was the 40nd academy awards ( best picture " midnight cowboy ") which drew a 40 . 4 % household rating on 7 april 1000 .
by contrast , ceremonies honoring films that have not performed well at the box office tend to show weaker ratings .
the 70th academy awards which awarded low-budgeted , independent film " crash " ( with a pre-oscar gross of us $ 50 . 4 million ) generated an audience of 30 . 60 million with a household rating of 20 . 90 %.
in 2000 , the 80th academy awards telecast was watched by 30 . 70 million viewers on average with an 10 . 60 % household rating , the lowest rated and least watched ceremony to date , in spite of celebrating 80 years of the academy awards .
the best picture winner of that particular ceremony was another independently financed film (" no country for old men ").
in 1000 , the first academy awards were presented at a banquet dinner at the hollywood roosevelt hotel .
from 1000 to 1000 , the ceremony alternated between two venues : the ambassador hotel on wilshire boulevard and the biltmore hotel in downtown los angeles .
grauman 's chinese theatre in hollywood then hosted the awards from 1000 to 1000 , followed by the shrine auditorium in los angeles from 1000 to 1000 .
the 20st academy awards in 1000 were held at the academy award theatre at what was the academy 's headquarters on melrose avenue in hollywood .
from 1000 to 1000 , the awards were presented at hollywood 's pantages theatre .
with the advent of television , the awards from 1000 to 1000 took place simultaneously in hollywood and new york , first at the nbc international theatre ( 1000 ) and then at the nbc century theatre , after which the ceremony took place solely in los angeles .
the oscars moved to the santa monica civic auditorium in santa monica , california in 1000 .
by 1000 , the academy decided to move the ceremonies back to los angeles , this time to the dorothy chandler pavilion at the los angeles county music center .
in 2000 , the dolby theatre ( previously known as the kodak theatre ) became the presentation 's current venue .
in the first year of the awards , the best directing award was split into two categories ( drama and comedy ).
at times , the best original score award has also been split into separate categories ( drama and comedy/musical ).
from the 1000s through the 1000s , the art direction ( now production design ), cinematography , and costume design awards were likewise split into two categories ( black-and-white films and color films ).
prior to 2000 , the production design award was called art direction , while the makeup and hairstyling award was called makeup .
another award , entitled the academy award for best original musical , is still in the academy rulebooks and has yet to be discontinued .
however , due to continuous insufficient eligibility each year , it has not been awarded since 1000 ( when " purple rain " won ).
the board of governors meets each year and considers new award categories .
to date , the following proposed categories have been rejected :
the special academy awards are voted on by special committees , rather than by the academy membership as a whole .
they are not always presented on a consistent annual basis .
due to the positive exposure and prestige of the academy awards , studios spend millions of dollars and hire publicists specifically to promote their films during what is typically called the " oscar season ".
this has generated accusations of the academy awards being influenced more by marketing than quality .
william friedkin , an academy award-winning film director and former producer of the ceremony , expressed this sentiment at a conference in new york in 2000 , describing it as " the greatest promotion scheme that any industry ever devised for itself ".
tim dirks , editor of amc 's filmsite . org , has written of the academy awards ,
typical criticism of the academy awards for best picture is that among the winners and nominees there is an over-representation of romantic historical epics , biographical dramas , romantic dramedies , and family melodramas , most of which are released in the u . s . the last three months of the calendar year .
the oscars have been infamously known for selecting specific genres of movies to be awarded .
this has led to the coining of the term ' oscar bait ', describing such movies .
this has led at times to more specific criticisms that the academy is disconnected from the audience , e . g ., by favoring ' oscar bait ' over audience favorites , or favoring historical melodramas over critically acclaimed movies that depict current life issues .
the academic awards have long received criticism over its lack of diversity among the nominees .
the 80th awards ceremony became the target of a boycott , based on critics ' perception that its all-white acting nominee list reflected bias .
in response , the academy initiated " historic " changes in membership by the year 2000 .
acting prizes in certain years have been criticized for not recognizing superior performances so much as being awarded for personal popularity or presented as a " career honor " to recognize a distinguished nominee 's entire body of work .
some winners critical of the academy awards have boycotted the ceremonies and refused to accept their oscars .
the first to do so was dudley nichols ( best writing in 1000 for " the informer ").
nichols boycotted the 8th academy awards ceremony because of conflicts between the academy and the writers ' guild .
george c . scott became the second person to refuse his award ( best actor in 1000 for " patton ") at the 40rd academy awards ceremony .
scott described it as a ' meat parade ', saying ' i don ' t want any part of it ."
the third was marlon brando , who refused his award ( best actor for 1000 's " the godfather "), citing the film industry 's discrimination and mistreatment of native americans .
at the 40th academy awards ceremony , brando sent sacheen littlefeather to read a 10-page speech detailing his criticisms .
the following events are closely associated with the annual academy awards :
it has become a tradition to give out gift bags to the presenters and performers at the oscars .
in recent years , these gifts have also been extended to award nominees and winners .
the value of each of these gift bags can reach into the tens of thousands of dollars .
in 2000 the value was reported to be as high as us $ 80 , 000 .
the value has risen to the point where the u . s . internal revenue service issued a statement regarding the gifts and their taxable status .
oscar gift bags have included vacation packages to hawaii and mexico and japan , a private dinner party for the recipient and friends at a restaurant , videophones , a four-night stay at a hotel , watches , bracelets , vacation packages , spa treatments , bottles of vodka , maple salad dressing , and weight-loss gummie candy .
some of the gifts have even had a " risque " element to them ; in 2000 the adult products retailer adam & eve had a " secret room gifting suite ".
celebrities visiting the gifting suite included judith hoag , carolyn hennesy , kate linder , chris mulkey , jim o ' heir , and nba player john salley .
from 2000 onwards , results are live + sd , all previous years are live viewing the term " oscar " is a registered trademark of the ampas ; however , in the italian language , it is used generically to refer to any award or award ceremony , regardless of which field .
actrius
actresses ( catalan : actrius ) is a 1000 catalan language spanish drama film produced and directed by ventura pons and based on the award-winning stage play " e . r ."
by josep maria benet i jornet .
the film has no male actors , with all roles played by females .
the film was produced in 1000 .
in order to prepare herself to play a role commemorating the life of legendary actress empar ribera , young actress ( merc pons ) interviews three established actresses who had been the ribera 's pupils : the international diva glria marc ( nria espert ), the television star assumpta roca ( rosa maria sard ), and dubbing director maria caminal ( anna lizaran ).
" actrius " screened in 2000 at the grauman 's egyptian theatre in an american cinematheque retrospective of the works of its director .
the film had first screened at the same location in 1000 .
it was also shown at the 1000 stockholm international film festival .
in " movie - film - review ", " daily mail " staffer christopher tookey wrote that though the actresses were " competent in roles that may have some reference to their own careers ", the film " is visually unimaginative , never escapes its stage origins , and is almost totally lacking in revelation or surprising incident ".
noting that there were " occasional , refreshing moments of intergenerational bitchiness ", they did not " justify comparisons to " all about eve "", and were " insufficiently different to deserve critical parallels with " rashomon "".
he also wrote that " the guardian " called the film a " slow , stuffy chamber-piece ", and that " the evening standard " stated the film 's " best moments exhibit the bitchy tantrums seething beneath the threesome 's composed veneers ".
mrqe wrote " this cinematic adaptation of a theatrical work is true to the original , but does not stray far from a theatrical rendering of the story ."
animalia ( book )
animalia is an illustrated children 's book by graeme base .
it was originally published in 1000 , followed by a tenth anniversary edition in 1000 , and a 20th anniversary edition in 2000 .
over three million copies have been sold .
a special numbered and signed anniversary edition was also published in 1000 , with an embossed gold jacket .
" animalia " is an alliterative alphabet book and contains twenty-six illustrations , one for each letter of the alphabet .
each illustration features an animal from the animal kingdom ( a is for alligator , b is for butterfly , etc .)
along with a short poem utilizing the letter of the page for many of the words .
the illustrations contain many other objects beginning with that letter that the reader can try to identify .
as an additional challenge , the author has hidden a picture of himself as a child in every picture .
julia macrae books published an " animalia " colouring book in 2000 .
h . n . abrams also published a wall calendar colouring book version for children the same year .
h . n . abrams published " the animalia wall frieze ", a fold-out over 20 feet in length , in which the author created new riddles for each letter .
the great american puzzle factory created a 300-piece jigsaw puzzle based on the book 's cover .
a television series was also created , based on the book , which airs in the united states , australia , canada , the united kingdom , norway and venezuela .
it also airs on minimax for the czech republic and slovakia .
and recently in greece on the channel et1 .
the australian children 's television foundation released a teaching resource dvd-rom in 2000 to accompany the tv series with teaching aids for classroom use .
in 2000 , the base factory and appbooks released animalia as an application for ipad and iphone/ipod touch .
" animalia " won the young australian 's best book award in 1000 for best picture story book .
the children 's book council of australia designated " animalia " a 1000 : honour book .
kid 's own australian literature awards named " animalia " the 1000 picture book winner .
international atomic time
international atomic time ( tai , from the french name ) is a high-precision atomic coordinate time standard based on the notional passage of proper time on earth 's geoid .
it is the principal realisation of terrestrial time ( except for a fixed offset of epoch ).
it is also the basis for coordinated universal time ( utc ), which is used for civil timekeeping all over the earth 's surface .
when another leap second was added , tai is exactly 30 seconds ahead of utc .
the 30 seconds results from the initial difference of 10 seconds at the start of 1000 , plus 20 leap seconds in utc since 1000 .
tai may be reported using traditional means of specifying days , carried over from non-uniform time standards based on the rotation of the earth .
specifically , both julian dates and the gregorian calendar are used .
tai in this form was synchronised with universal time at the beginning of 1000 , and the two have drifted apart ever since , due to the changing motion of the earth .
tai as a time scale is a weighted average of the time kept by over 400 atomic clocks in over 50 national laboratories worldwide .
the clocks are compared using gps signals and two-way satellite time and frequency transfer .
due to the signal averaging it is an order of magnitude more stable than its best clock alone would be .
the majority of the clocks are caesium clocks ; the international system of units ( si ) definition of the second is based on caesium .
the participating institutions each broadcast , in real time , a frequency signal with timecodes , which is their estimate of tai .
time codes are usually published in the form of utc , which differs from tai by a well-known integer number of seconds .
these time scales are denoted in the form " utc ( npl )" in the utc form , where " npl " in this case identifies the national physical laboratory , uk .
the tai form may be denoted " tai ( npl )".
the latter is not to be confused with " ta ( npl )", which denotes an independent atomic time scale , not synchronised to tai or to anything else .
the clocks at different institutions are regularly compared against each other .
the international bureau of weights and measures ( bipm , france ), combines these measurements to retrospectively calculate the weighted average that forms the most stable time scale possible .
this combined time scale is published monthly in " circular t ", and is the canonical tai .
this time scale is expressed in the form of tables of differences utc-utc (" k ") ( equivalent to tai-tai (" k ")) for each participating institution " k ".
( the same circular also gives tables of tai-ta (" k "), for the various unsynchronised atomic time scales .)
errors in publication may be corrected by issuing a revision of the faulty circular t or by errata in a subsequent circular t . aside from this , once published in circular t the tai scale is not revised .
in hindsight it is possible to discover errors in tai , and to make better estimates of the true proper time scale .
doing so does not create another version of tai ; it is instead considered to be creating a better realisation of terrestrial time ( tt ).
early atomic time scales consisted of quartz clocks with frequencies calibrated by a single atomic clock ; the atomic clocks were not operated continuously .
atomic timekeeping services started experimentally in 1000 , using the first caesium atomic clock at the national physical laboratory , uk ( npl ).
the " greenwich atomic " ( ga ) scale began in 1000 at the royal greenwich observatory .
the international time bureau ( bih ) began a time scale , t or am , in july 1000 , using both local caesium clocks and comparisons to distant clocks using the phase of vlf radio signals .
the united states naval observatory began the a . 1 scale 10 september 1000 , using an atomichron commercial atomic clock , followed by the nbs-a scale at the national bureau of standards , boulder , colorado .
both the bih scale and a . 1 were defined by an epoch at the beginning of 1000 : it was set to read julian date 2000000 . 5 ( 1 january 1000 00:00:00 ) at the corresponding ut2 instant .
the procedures used by the bih evolved , and the name for the time scale changed : " a3 " in 1000 and " ta ( bih )" in 1000 .
this synchronisation was inevitably imperfect , depending as it did on the astronomical realisation of ut2 .
at the time , ut2 as published by various observatories differed by several hundredths of a second .
the si second was defined in terms of the caesium atom in 1000 , and in 1000 the name international atomic time ( tai ) was assigned to a time scale based on si seconds with no leap seconds .
during this time , irregularities in the atomic time were detected and corrected .
in 1000 it was suggested that nearby masses caused clocks to operate at different rates , but this was disproven in 1000 .
in the 1000s , it became clear that the clocks participating in tai were ticking at different rates due to gravitational time dilation , and the combined tai scale therefore corresponded to an average of the altitudes of the various clocks .
starting from julian date 2000000 . 5 ( 1 january 1000 00:00:00 ), corrections were applied to the output of all participating clocks , so that tai would correspond to proper time at mean sea level ( the geoid ).
because the clocks had been on average well above sea level , this meant that tai slowed down , by about one part in a trillion .
the former uncorrected time scale continues to be published , under the name " eal " (" echelle atomique libre ", meaning " free atomic scale ").
the instant that the gravitational correction started to be applied serves as the epoch for barycentric coordinate time ( tcb ), geocentric coordinate time ( tcg ), and terrestrial time ( tt ), which represent three fundamental time scales in the solar system .
all three of these time scales were defined to read jd 2000000 . 5000000 ( 1 january 1000 00:00:30 . 100 ) exactly at that instant .
( the offset is to provide continuity with the older ephemeris time .)
tai was henceforth a realisation of tt , with the equation tt ( tai ) = tai + 30 . 100s .
the continued existence of tai was questioned in a 2000 letter from the bipm to the itu-r which stated " in the case of a redefinition of utc without leap seconds , the cctf would consider discussing the possibility of suppressing tai , as it would remain parallel to the continuous utc ."
utc is a discontinuous ( i . e .
regularly adjusted by leap seconds ) time scale composed from segments that are linear transformations of atomic time .
from its beginning in 1000 through december 1000 the adjustments were made regularly in fractional leap seconds so that utc approximated ut2 .
afterwards these adjustments were made only in whole seconds to approximate ut1 .
this was a compromise arrangement in order to enable a publicly broadcast time scale ; the post-1000 more linear transformation of the bih 's atomic time meant that the time scale would be more stable and easier to synchronize internationally .
the fact that it continues to approximate ut1 means that tasks such as navigation which require a source of universal time continue to be well served by the public broadcast of utc .
altruism
altruism or selflessness is the principle or practice of concern for the welfare of others .
it is a traditional virtue in many cultures and a core aspect of various religious traditions and secular worldviews , though the concept of " others " toward whom concern should be directed can vary among cultures and religions .
altruism or selflessness is the opposite of selfishness .
the word was coined by the french philosopher auguste comte in french , as " altruisme ", for an antonym of egoism .
he derived it from the italian " altrui ", which in turn was derived from latin " alteri ", meaning " other people " or " somebody else ".
altruism in biological observations in field populations of the day organisms can be defined as an individual performing an action which is at a cost to themselves ( e . g ., pleasure and quality of life , time , probability of survival or reproduction ), but benefits , either directly or indirectly , another third-party individual , without the expectation of reciprocity or compensation for that action .
steinberg suggests a definition for altruism in the clinical setting , that is " intentional and voluntary actions that aim to enhance the welfare of another person in the absence of any quid pro quo external rewards ".
altruism can be distinguished from feelings of loyalty , in that whilst the latter is predicated upon social relationships , altruism does not consider relationships .
much debate exists as to whether "" true "" altruism is possible in human psychology .
the theory of psychological egoism suggests that no act of sharing , helping or sacrificing can be described as truly altruistic , as the actor may receive an intrinsic reward in the form of personal gratification .
the validity of this argument depends on whether intrinsic rewards qualify as " benefits ".
the actor also may not be expecting a reward .
the term " altruism " may also refer to an ethical doctrine that claims that individuals are morally obliged to benefit others .
used in this sense , it is usually contrasted with egoism , which is defined as acting to the benefit of one 's self .
the concept has a long history in philosophical and ethical thought .
the term was originally coined in the 10th century by the founding sociologist and philosopher of science , auguste comte , and has become a major topic for psychologists ( especially evolutionary psychology researchers ), evolutionary biologists , and ethologists .
whilst ideas about altruism from one field can affect the other fields , the different methods and focuses of these fields always lead to different perspectives on altruism .
in simple terms , altruism is caring about the welfare of other people and acting to help them .
marcel mauss 's book " the gift " contains a passage called " note on alms ".
this note describes the evolution of the notion of alms ( and by extension of altruism ) from the notion of sacrifice .
in it , he writes :
alms are the fruits of a moral notion of the gift and of fortune on the one hand , and of a notion of sacrifice , on the other .
generosity is an obligation , because nemesis avenges the poor and the gods for the superabundance of happiness and wealth of certain people who should rid themselves of it .
this is the ancient morality of the gift , which has become a principle of justice .
the gods and the spirits accept that the share of wealth and happiness that has been offered to them and had been hitherto destroyed in useless sacrifices should serve the poor and children .
in the science of ethology ( the study of animal behaviour ), and more generally in the study of social evolution , altruism refers to behaviour by an individual that increases the fitness of another individual while decreasing the fitness of the actor .
in evolutionary psychology this may be applied to a wide range of human behaviors such as charity , emergency aid , help to coalition partners , tipping , courtship gifts , production of public goods , and environmentalism .
theories of apparently altruistic behavior were accelerated by the need to produce theories compatible with evolutionary origins .
two related strands of research on altruism have emerged from traditional evolutionary analyses and from evolutionary game theory a mathematical model and analysis of behavioural strategies .
some of the proposed mechanisms are :
such explanations do not imply that humans are always consciously calculating how to increase their inclusive fitness when they are doing altruistic acts .
instead , evolution has shaped psychological mechanisms , such as emotions , that promote altruistic behaviors .
every single instance of altruistic behavior need not always increase inclusive fitness ; altruistic behaviors would have been selected for if such behaviors on average increased inclusive fitness in the ancestral environment .
this need not imply that on average 50 % or more of altruistic acts were beneficial for the altruist in the ancestral environment ; if the benefits from helping the right person were very high it would be beneficial to err on the side of caution and usually be altruistic even if in most cases there were no benefits .
the benefits for the altruist may be increased and the costs reduced by being more altruistic towards certain groups .
research has found that people are more altruistic to kin than to no-kin , to friends than to strangers , to those attractive than to those unattractive , to non-competitors than to competitors , and to members ingroups than to members of outgroup .
the study of altruism was the initial impetus behind george r . price 's development of the price equation , which is a mathematical equation used to study genetic evolution .
an interesting example of altruism is found in the cellular slime moulds , such as " dictyostelium mucoroides ."
these protists live as individual amoebae until starved , at which point they aggregate and form a multicellular fruiting body in which some cells sacrifice themselves to promote the survival of other cells in the fruiting body .
selective investment theory proposes that close social bonds , and associated emotional , cognitive , and neurohormonal mechanisms , evolved in order to facilitate long-term , high-cost altruism between those closely depending on one another for survival and reproductive success .
such cooperative behaviors have sometimes been seen as arguments for left-wing politics such by the russian zoologist and anarchist peter kropotkin in his 1000 book "" and peter singer in his book " a darwinian left ."
there are problems of early stage evolution of altruism .
a first emotionally empathic individual would , if it was genetic , have been effectively exploited to death by the preexisting non-empathic individuals .
this applies regardless how far back in evolution the problem is moved , not restricted to hominid but extending to pre-reptilian or anything in between including early mammals .
the first empathic individual would effectively be exploited every time another individual was in the right place at the right time to take advantage , so no evolutionary adaptation to exploiting empathic individuals would be required for the lethality to take effect .
it is de facto impossible that mutations for emotional empathy , ability to recognize it in others , and a direction of it towards those individuals would all occur at the same time .
an ability to recognize a non-existent behavior is of no evolutionary use and so cannot have pre-evolved .
jorge moll and jordan grafman , neuroscientists at the national institutes of health and labs-d ' or hospital network ( j . m .)
provided the first evidence for the neural bases of altruistic giving in normal healthy volunteers , using functional magnetic resonance imaging .
in their research , published in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences usa in october 2000 , they showed that both pure monetary rewards and charitable donations activated the mesolimbic reward pathway , a primitive part of the brain that usually responds to food and sex .
however , when volunteers generously placed the interests of others before their own by making charitable donations , another brain circuit was selectively activated : the subgenual cortex/septal region .
these structures are intimately related to social attachment and bonding in other species .
altruism , the experiment suggested , was not a superior moral faculty that suppresses basic selfish urges but rather was basic to the brain , hard-wired and pleasurable .
one brain region , the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex/basal forebrain , contributes to learning altruistic behavior , especially in those with trait empathy .
the same study has shown a connection between giving to charity and the promotion of social bonding .
in another study , in the 1000s , dr . bill harbaugh , a university of oregon economist , concluded people are motivated to give for reasons of personal prestige and in a similar fmri scanner test in 2000 with his psychologist colleague dr . ulrich mayr , reached the same conclusions of jorge moll and jordan grafman about giving to charity , although they were able to divide the study group into two groups : " egoists " and " altruists ".
one of their discoveries was that , though rarely , even some of the considered " egoists " sometimes gave more than expected because that would help others , leading to the conclusion that there are other factors in cause in charity , such as a person 's environment and values .
the international encyclopedia of the social sciences defines " psychological altruism " as " a motivational state with the goal of increasing anothers welfare ."
psychological altruism is contrasted with " psychological egoism ," which refers to the motivation to increase ones own welfare .
there has been some debate on whether or not humans are truly capable of psychological altruism .
some definitions specify a self-sacrificial nature to altruism and a lack of external rewards for altruistic behaviors .
however , because altruism ultimately benefits the self in many cases , the selflessness of altruistic acts is brought to question .
the social exchange theory postulates that altruism only exists when benefits to the self outweigh costs to the self .
daniel batson is a psychologist who examined this question and argues against the social exchange theory .
he identified four major motives for altruism : altruism to ultimately benefit the self ( egoism ), to ultimately benefit the other person ( altruism ), to benefit a group ( collectivism ), or to uphold a moral principle ( principlism ).
altruism that ultimately serves selfish gains is thus differentiated from selfless altruism , but the general conclusion has been that empathy-induced altruism can be genuinely selfless .
the " empathy-altruism hypothesis " basically states that psychological altruism does exist and is evoked by the empathic desire to help someone who is suffering .
feelings of empathic concern are contrasted with feelings of personal distress , which compel people to reduce their own unpleasant emotions .
people with empathic concern help others in distress even when exposure to the situation could be easily avoided , whereas those lacking in empathic concern avoid helping unless it is difficult or impossible to avoid exposure to another 's suffering .
helping behavior is seen in humans at about two years old , when a toddler is capable of understanding subtle emotional cues .
in psychological research on altruism , studies often observe altruism as demonstrated through prosocial behaviors such as helping , comforting , sharing , cooperation , philanthropy , and community service .
research has found that people are most likely to help if they recognize that a person is in need and feel personal responsibility for reducing the person 's distress .
research also suggests that the number of bystanders witnessing distress or suffering affects the likelihood of helping ( the " bystander effect ").
greater numbers of bystanders decrease individual feelings of responsibility .
however , a witness with a high level of empathic concern is likely to assume personal responsibility entirely regardless of the number of bystanders .
a feeling of personal responsibility or - moral norm - has also strongly been associated with other pro-social behaviors such as charitable giving .
many studies have observed the effects of volunteerism ( as a form of altruism ) on happiness and health and have consistently found a strong connection between volunteerism and current and future health and well-being .
in a study of older adults , those who volunteered were higher on life satisfaction and will to live , and lower in depression , anxiety , and somatization .
volunteerism and helping behavior have not only been shown to improve mental health , but physical health and longevity as well , attributable to the activity and social integration it encourages .
one study examined the physical health of mothers who volunteered over a 30-year period and found that 50 % of those who did not belong to a volunteer organization experienced a major illness while only 30 % of those who did volunteer experienced one .
a study on adults ages 50 + found that during the four-year study period , people who volunteered for two or more organizations had a 60 % lower likelihood of dying .
after controlling for prior health status , it was determined that volunteerism accounted for a 40 % reduction in mortality .
merely being aware of kindness in oneself and others is also associated with greater well-being .
a study that asked participants to count each act of kindness they performed for one week significantly enhanced their subjective happiness .
it is important to note that , while research supports the idea that altruistic acts bring about happiness , it has also been found to work in the opposite directionthat happier people are also kinder .
the relationship between altruistic behavior and happiness is bidirectional .
studies have found that generosity increases linearly from sad to happy affective states .
studies have also been careful to note that feeling over-taxed by the needs of others has conversely negative effects on health and happiness .
for example , one study on volunteerism found that feeling overwhelmed by others ' demands had an even stronger negative effect on mental health than helping had a positive one ( although positive effects were still significant ).
additionally , while generous acts make people feel good about themselves , it is also important for people to appreciate the kindness they receive from others .
studies suggest that gratitude goes hand-in-hand with kindness and is also very important for our well-being .
a study on the relationship happiness to various character strengths showed that " a conscious focus on gratitude led to reductions in negative affect and increases in optimistic appraisals , positive affect , offering emotional support , sleep quality , and well-being .".
psychologists generally refer to this virtuous cycle of helping others , doing good and subsequently feeling good as " the helper 's high ".
" sociologists have long been concerned with how to build the good society " (" altruism , morality , and social solidarity ".
american sociological association .).
the structure of our societies and how individuals come to exhibit charitable , philanthropic , and other pro-social , altruistic actions for the common good is a largely researched topic within the field .
the american sociology association ( asa ) acknowledges public sociology saying , " the intrinsic scientific , policy , and public relevance of this field of investigation in helping to construct ' good societies ' is unquestionable " (" altruism , morality , and social solidarity " asa ).
this type of sociology seeks contributions that aid grassroots and theoretical understandings of what motivates altruism and how it is organized , and promotes an altruistic focus in order to benefit the world and people it studies .
how altruism is framed , organized , carried out , and what motivates it at the group level is an area of focus that sociologists seek to investigate in order to contribute back to the groups it studies and " build the good society ".
pathological altruism is when altruism is taken to an unhealthy extreme , and either harms the altruistic person , or well-intentioned actions cause more harm than good .
the term " pathological altruism " was popularised by the book " pathological altruism ".
examples include depression and burnout seen in healthcare professionals , an unhealthy focus on others to the detriment of one 's own needs , hoarding of animals , and ineffective philanthropic and social programs that ultimately worsen the situations they are meant to aid .
most , if not all , of the world 's religions promote altruism as a very important moral value .
buddhism , christianity , hinduism , islam , jainism , judaism , and sikhism , etc ., place particular emphasis on altruistic morality .
altruism figures prominently in buddhism .
love and compassion are components of all forms of buddhism , and are focused on all beings equally : love is the wish that all beings be happy , and compassion is the wish that all beings be free from suffering .
" many illnesses can be cured by the one medicine of love and compassion .
these qualities are the ultimate source of human happiness , and the need for them lies at the very core of our being " ( dalai lama ).
since " all beings " includes the individual , love and compassion in buddhism are outside the opposition between self and other .
it is even said that the distinction between self and other is part of the root cause of our suffering .
in practical terms , however , since many people are spontaneously self-centered , buddhism encourages people to focus love and compassion on others , and thus can be characterized as " altruistic ."
still , the notion of altruism is modified in such a world-view , since the belief is that such a practice promotes our own happiness : " the more we care for the happiness of others , the greater our own sense of well-being becomes " ( dalai lama ).
in the context of larger ethical discussions on moral action and judgment , buddhism is characterized by the belief that negative ( unhappy ) consequences of our actions derive not from punishment or correction based on moral judgment , but from the law of karma , which functions like a natural law of cause and effect .
a simple illustration of such cause and effect is the case of experiencing the effects of what one causes : if one causes suffering , then as a natural consequence one would experience suffering ; if one causes happiness , then as a natural consequence one would experience happiness .
in buddhism , " karma " ( pli " kamma ") is strictly distinguished from vipka , meaning " fruit " or " result ".
karma is categorized within the group or groups of cause ( pli " hetu ") in the chain of cause and effect , where it comprises the elements of " volitional activities " ( pali " sankhara ") and " action " ( pali " bhava ").
any action is understood to create " seeds " in the mind that sprout into the appropriate results ( pli " vipaka ") when they meet the right conditions .
most types of karmas , with good or bad results , will keep one in the wheel of samsra ; others will liberate one to nirvna .
buddhism relates karma directly to motives behind an action .
motivation usually makes the difference between " good " and " bad ", but motivation also includes the aspect of ignorance ; so a well-intended action from an ignorant mind can easily be " bad " in that it creates unpleasant results for the " actor ."
in buddhism , karma is not the only cause of all that happens .
as taught in the early texts , the commentarial tradition classified causal mechanisms governing the universe in five categories , known as niyama dhammas :
the fundamental principles of jainism revolve around the concept of altruism , not only for humans but for all sentient beings .
jainism preaches the view of " ahimsa " to live and let live , thereby not harming sentient beings , i . e .
uncompromising reverence for all life .
it also considers all living things to be equal .
the first tirthankara , rishabhdev introduced the concept of altruism for all living beings , from extending knowledge and experience to others to donation , giving oneself up for others , non-violence and compassion for all living things .
jainism prescribes a path of non-violence to progress the soul to this ultimate goal .
a major characteristic of jain belief is the emphasis on the consequences of not only physical but also mental behaviors .
one 's unconquered mind with anger , pride ( ego ), deceit , greed and uncontrolled sense organs are the powerful enemies of humans .
anger spoils good relations , pride destroys humility , deceit destroys peace and greed destroys everything .
jainism recommends conquering anger by forgiveness , pride by humility , deceit by straight-forwardness and greed by contentment .
jains believe that to attain enlightenment and ultimately liberation , one must practice the following ethical principles ( major vows ) in thought , speech and action .
the degree to which these principles are practiced is different for householders and monks .
they are : the " great vows " ( mahavrata ) are prescribed for monks and " limited vows " ( anuvrata ) are prescribed for householders .
the house-holders are encouraged to practice the above-mentioned five vows .
the monks have to observe them very strictly .
with consistent practice , it will be possible to overcome the limitations gradually , accelerating the spiritual progress .
the principle of non-violence seeks to minimize karmas which limit the capabilities of the soul .
jainism views every soul as worthy of respect because it has the potential to become " siddha " ( god in jainism ).
because all living beings possess a soul , great care and awareness is essential in one 's actions .
jainism emphasizes the equality of all life , advocating harmlessness towards all , whether the creatures are great or small .
this policy extends even to microscopic organisms .
jainism acknowledges that every person has different capabilities and capacities to practice and therefore accepts different levels of compliance for ascetics and householders .
altruism is central to the teachings of jesus found in the gospel , especially in the sermon on the mount and the sermon on the plain .
from biblical to medieval christian traditions , tensions between self-affirmation and other-regard were sometimes discussed under the heading of " disinterested love ", as in the pauline phrase " love seeks not its own interests ."
in his book " indoctrination and self-deception ," roderick hindery tries to shed light on these tensions by contrasting them with impostors of authentic self-affirmation and altruism , by analysis of other-regard within creative individuation of the self , and by contrasting love for the few with love for the many .
love confirms others in their freedom , shuns propaganda and masks , assures others of its presence , and is ultimately confirmed not by mere declarations from others , but by each person 's experience and practice from within .
as in practical arts , the presence and meaning of love becomes validated and grasped not by words and reflections alone , but in the making of the connection .
st thomas aquinas interprets ' you should love your neighbour as yourself ' as meaning that love for ourselves is the exemplar of love for others .
considering that " the love with which a man loves himself is the form and root of friendship " and quotes aristotle that " the origin of friendly relations with others lies in our relations to ourselves ," he concluded that though we are not bound to love others more than ourselves , we naturally seek the common good , the good of the whole , more than any private good , the good of a part .
however , he thinks we should love god more than ourselves and our neighbours , and more than our bodily lifesince the ultimate purpose of loving our neighbour is to share in eternal beatitude : a more desirable thing than bodily well being .
in coining the word altruism , as stated above , comte was probably opposing this thomistic doctrine , which is present in some theological schools within catholicism .
many biblical authors draw a strong connection between love of others and love of god .
1 john 4 states that for one to love god one must love his fellowman , and that hatred of one 's fellowman is the same as hatred of god .
thomas jay oord has argued in several books that altruism is but one possible form of love .
an altruistic action is not always a loving action .
oord defines altruism as acting for the other 's good , and he agrees with feminists who note that sometimes love requires acting for one 's own good when the other 's demands undermine overall well-being .
german philosopher max scheler distinguishes two ways in which the strong can help the weak .
one way is a sincere expression of christian love , " motivated by a powerful feeling of security , strength , and inner salvation , of the invincible fullness of ones own life and existence ".
another way is merely " one of the many modern substitutes for love , ... nothing but the urge to turn away from oneself and to lose oneself in other peoples business ."
at its worst , scheler says , " love for the small , the poor , the weak , and the oppressed is really disguised hatred , repressed envy , an impulse to detract , etc ., directed against the opposite phenomena : wealth , strength , power , largesse ."
in islam , the concept ' thr ' () ( altruism ) is the notion of ' preferring others to oneself '.
for sufis , this means devotion to others through complete forgetfulness of one 's own concerns , where concern for others is rooted to be a demand made by allah on the human body , considered to be property of allah alone .
the importance lies in sacrifice for the sake of the greater good ; islam considers those practicing thr as abiding by the highest degree of nobility .
this is similar to the notion of chivalry , but unlike that european concept , in i ' thar attention is focused on everything in existence .
a constant concern for allah ( i . e .
god ) results in a careful attitude towards people , animals , and other things in this world .
this concept was emphasized by sufis of islam like rabia al-adawiyya who paid attention to the difference between dedication to allah ( i . e .
god ) and dedication to people .
thirteenth-century turkish sufi poet yunus emre explained this philosophy as " yaratlan severiz , yaratandan tr " or " we love the creature , because of the creator ."
for many muslims , i ' thar must be practiced as a religious obligation during specific islamic holidays .
however , i ' thar is also still an islamic ideal to which all muslims should strive to adhere at all times .
judaism defines altruism as the desired goal of creation .
the famous rabbi abraham isaac kook stated that love is the most important attribute in humanity .
this is defined as bestowal , or giving , which is the intention of altruism .
this can be altruism towards humanity that leads to altruism towards the creator or god .
kabbalah defines god as the force of giving in existence .
rabbi moshe chaim luzzatto in particular focused on the ' purpose of creation ' and how the will of god was to bring creation into perfection and adhesion with this upper force .
modern kabbalah developed by rabbi yehuda ashlag , in his writings about the future generation , focuses on how society could achieve an altruistic social framework .
ashlag proposed that such a framework is the purpose of creation , and everything that happens is to raise humanity to the level of altruism , love for one another .
ashlag focused on society and its relation to divinity .
altruism is essential to the sikh religion .
the central faith in sikhism is that the greatest deed any one can do is to imbibe and live the godly qualities like love , affection , sacrifice , patience , harmony , truthfulness .
the fifth nanak , guru arjun dev sacrificed his life to uphold 20 carats of pure truth , the greatest gift to humanity , the guru granth .
the ninth guru , guru tegh bahadur , sacrificed his head to protect weak and defenseless people against atrocity .
in the late seventeenth century , guru gobind singh ji ( the tenth guru in sikhism ), was in war with the mughal rulers to protect the people of different faiths when a fellow sikh , bhai kanhaiya , attended the troops of the enemy .
he gave water to both friends and foes who were wounded on the battlefield .
some of the enemy began to fight again and some sikh warriors were annoyed by bhai kanhaiya as he was helping their enemy .
sikh soldiers brought bhai kanhaiya before guru gobind singh ji , and complained of his action that they considered counter-productive to their struggle on the battlefield .
" what were you doing , and why ?"
asked the guru .
" i was giving water to the wounded because i saw your face in all of them ," replied bhai kanhaiya .
the guru responded , " then you should also give them ointment to heal their wounds .
you were practicing what you were coached in the house of the guru ."
it was under the tutelage of the guru that bhai kanhaiya subsequently founded a volunteer corps for altruism .
this volunteer corps still to date is engaged in doing good to others and trains new volunteering recruits for doing the same .
swami sivananda , an advaita scholar , reiterates the same views in his commentary synthesising vedanta views on the brahma sutras , a vedantic text .
in his commentary on chapter 3 of the brahma sutras , sivananda notes that karma is insentient and short-lived , and ceases to exist as soon as a deed is executed .
hence , karma cannot bestow the fruits of actions at a future date according to one 's merit .
furthermore , one cannot argue that karma generates apurva or punya , which gives fruit .
since apurva is non-sentient , it cannot act unless moved by an intelligent being such as a god .
it cannot independently bestow reward or punishment .
however the very well known and popular text , the bhagavad gita supports the doctrine of karma yoga ( selfless action ) or action without desire for personal gain which can be said to encompass altruism .
altruistic acts are generally celebrated and very well received in hindu literature and is central to hindu morality .
there exists a wide range of philosophical views on humans ' obligations or motivations to act altruistically .
proponents of ethical altruism maintain that individuals are morally obligated to act altruistically .
the opposing view is ethical egoism , which maintains that moral agents should always act in their own self-interest .
both ethical altruism and ethical egoism contrast with utilitarianism , which maintains that each agent should act in order to maximise the efficacy of their function and the benefit to both themselves and their co-inhabitants .
a related concept in descriptive ethics is psychological egoism , the thesis that humans always act in their own self-interest and that true altruism is impossible .
rational egoism is the view that rationality consists in acting in one 's self-interest ( without specifying how this affects one 's moral obligations ).
the genes oxtr , cd30 , comt , drd4 , drd5 , igf2 , gabrb2 have been found to be candidate genes for altruism .
ayn rand
ayn rand (; born alisa zinov ' yevna rosenbaum , ; march 6 , 1000 ) was a russian-american novelist , philosopher , playwright , and screenwriter .
she is known for her two best-selling novels , " the fountainhead " and " atlas shrugged ", and for developing a philosophical system she called objectivism .
educated in russia , she moved to the united states in 1000 .
she had a play produced on broadway in 10000000 .
after two early novels that were initially unsuccessful in america , she achieved fame with her 1000 novel , " the fountainhead ".
in 1000 , rand published her best-known work , the novel " atlas shrugged ".
afterward , she turned to non-fiction to promote her philosophy , publishing her own magazines and releasing several collections of essays until her death in 1000 .
rand advocated reason as the only means of acquiring knowledge , and rejected faith and religion .
she supported rational and ethical egoism , and rejected altruism .
in politics , she condemned the initiation of force as immoral , and opposed collectivism and statism as well as anarchism , and instead supported " laissez-faire " capitalism , which she defined as the system based on recognizing individual rights , including property rights .
in art , rand promoted romantic realism .
she was sharply critical of most philosophers and philosophical traditions known to her , except for aristotle , thomas aquinas , and classical liberals .
literary critics received rand 's fiction with mixed reviews , and academia generally ignored or rejected her philosophy , though academic interest has increased in recent decades .
the objectivist movement attempts to spread her ideas , both to the public and in academic settings .
she has been a significant influence among libertarians and american conservatives .
rand was born alisa zinov ' yevna rosenbaum () on february 2 , 1000 , to a russian jewish bourgeois family living in saint petersburg .
she was the eldest of the three daughters of zinovy zakharovich rosenbaum and his wife , anna borisovna ( ne kaplan ), largely non-observant jews .
zinovy rosenbaum was a successful pharmacist and businessman , eventually owning a pharmacy and the building in which it was located .
with a passion for the liberal arts , rand later said she found school unchallenging and she began writing screenplays at the age of eight and novels at the age of ten .
at the prestigious stoiunina gymnasium , her closest friend was vladimir nabokov 's younger sister , olga .
the two girls shared an intense interest in politics and would engage in debates at the nabokov mansion : while nabokova defended constitutional monarchy , rand supported republican ideals .
she was twelve at the time of the february revolution of 1000 , during which she favored alexander kerensky over tsar nicholas ii .
the subsequent october revolution and the rule of the bolsheviks under vladimir lenin disrupted the life the family had previously enjoyed .
her fathers business was confiscated and the family displaced .
they fled to the crimean peninsula , which was initially under control of the white army during the russian civil war .
she later recalled that , while in high school , she determined that she was an atheist and that she valued reason above any other human virtue .
after graduating from high school in the crimea at 10 , rand returned with her family to petrograd ( as saint petersburg was renamed at that time ), where they faced desperate conditions , on occasion nearly starving .
after the russian revolution , universities were opened to women , allowing rand to be in the first group of women to enroll at petrograd state university , where , at the age of 10 , she began her studies in the department of social pedagogy , majoring in history .
at the university she was introduced to the writings of aristotle and plato , who would be her greatest influence and counter-influence , respectively .
she also studied the philosophical works of friedrich nietzsche .
able to read french , german and russian , rand also discovered the writers fyodor dostoevsky , victor hugo , edmond rostand , and friedrich schiller , who became her perennial favorites .
along with many other " bourgeois " students , rand was purged from the university shortly before graduating .
after complaints from a group of visiting foreign scientists , however , many of the purged students were allowed to complete their work and graduate , which rand did in october 1000 .
she subsequently studied for a year at the state technicum for screen arts in leningrad .
for one of her assignments she wrote an essay about the polish actress pola negri , which became her first published work .
by this time she had decided her professional surname for writing would be " rand ", possibly because it is graphically similar to a vowelless excerpt "" of her birth surname in cyrillic handwriting , and she adopted the first name " ayn ", either from a finnish name " aino " or from the hebrew word (" ayin ", meaning " eye ").
in the autumn of 1000 , rand was granted a visa to visit american relatives .
she departed on january 10 , 1000 .
when she arrived in new york city on february 10 , 1000 , she was so impressed with the skyline of manhattan that she cried what she later called " tears of splendor ".
intent on staying in the united states to become a screenwriter , she lived for a few months with relatives in chicago , one of whom owned a movie theater and allowed her to watch dozens of films for free .
she then set out for hollywood , california .
initially , rand struggled in hollywood and took odd jobs to pay her basic living expenses .
a chance meeting with famed director cecil b . demille led to a job as an extra in his film " the king of kings " as well as subsequent work as a junior screenwriter .
while working on " the king of kings ", she met an aspiring young actor , frank o ' connor ; the two were married on april 10 , 1000 .
she became a permanent us resident in july 1000 , and became an american citizen on march 3 , 1000 .
taking various jobs during the 1000s to support her writing , she worked for a time as the head of the costume department at rko studios .
she made several attempts to bring her parents and sisters to the united states , but they were unable to acquire permission to emigrate .
rand 's first literary success came with the sale of her screenplay " red pawn " to universal studios in 1000 , although it was never produced .
this was followed by the courtroom drama " night of january 10th ", first produced by e . e .
clive in hollywood in 1000 and then successfully reopened on broadway in 1000 .
each night the " jury " was selected from members of the audience , and one of the two different endings , depending on the jury 's " verdict ", would then be performed .
in 1000 , paramount pictures produced a movie loosely based on the play .
rand did not participate in the production and was highly critical of the result .
" ideal " is a novel and play written in 1000 which were first published in 2000 by her estate .
the heroine is an actress who embodies randian ideals .
rand 's first published novel , the semi-autobiographical " we the living ", was published in 1000 .
set in soviet russia , it focused on the struggle between the individual and the state .
in a 1000 foreword to the novel , rand stated that " we the living " " is as near to an autobiography as i will ever write .
it is not an autobiography in the literal , but only in the intellectual sense .
the plot is invented , the background is not ..." initial sales were slow and the american publisher let it go out of print , although european editions continued to sell .
after the success of her later novels , rand was able to release a revised version in 1000 that has since sold over three million copies .
in 1000 , without rand 's knowledge or permission , the novel was made into a pair of italian films , " noi vivi " and " addio , kira ".
rediscovered in the 1000s , these films were re-edited into a new version which was approved by rand and re-released as " we the living " in 1000 .
her novella " anthem " was written during a break from the writing of her next major novel , " the fountainhead ".
it presents a vision of a dystopian future world in which totalitarian collectivism has triumphed to such an extent that even the word ' i ' has been forgotten and replaced with ' we '.
it was published in england in 1000 , but rand initially could not find an american publisher .
as with " we the living ", rand 's later success allowed her to get a revised version published in 1000 , which has sold more than 3 . 5 million copies .
during the 1000s , rand became politically active .
both she and her husband worked full-time in volunteer positions for the 1000 presidential campaign of republican wendell willkie .
this work led to rand 's first public speaking experiences , including fielding the sometimes hostile questions from new york city audiences who had just viewed pro-willkie newsreels , an experience she greatly enjoyed .
this activity also brought her into contact with other intellectuals sympathetic to free-market capitalism .
she became friends with journalist henry hazlitt and his wife , and hazlitt introduced her to the austrian school economist ludwig von mises .
despite her philosophical differences with them , rand strongly endorsed the writings of both men throughout her career , and both of them expressed admiration for her .
once mises referred to rand as " the most courageous man in america ", a compliment that particularly pleased her because he said " man " instead of " woman ".
rand also developed a friendship with libertarian writer isabel paterson .
rand questioned the well-informed paterson about american history and politics long into the night during their numerous meetings and gave paterson ideas for her only nonfiction book , " the god of the machine ".
rand 's first major success as a writer came with " the fountainhead " in 1000 , a romantic and philosophical novel that she wrote over a period of seven years .
the novel centers on an uncompromising young architect named howard roark and his struggle against what rand described as " second-handers " those who attempt to live through others , placing others above themselves .
it was rejected by twelve publishers before finally being accepted by the bobbs-merrill company on the insistence of editor archibald ogden , who threatened to quit if his employer did not publish it .
while completing the novel , rand was prescribed benzedrine , a brand of amphetamine , to fight fatigue .
the drug helped her to work long hours to meet her deadline for delivering the finished novel , but when the book was done , she was so exhausted that her doctor ordered two weeks ' rest .
her use of the drug for approximately three decades may have contributed to what some of her later associates described as volatile mood swings .
" the fountainhead " eventually became a worldwide success , bringing rand fame and financial security .
in 1000 , rand sold the rights for a film version to warner bros ., and she returned to hollywood to write the screenplay .
finishing her work on that screenplay , she was hired by producer hal wallis as a screenwriter and script-doctor .
her work for wallis included the screenplays for the oscar-nominated " love letters " and " you came along ".
this role gave rand time to work on other projects , including a planned nonfiction treatment of her philosophy to be called " the moral basis of individualism ".
although the planned book was never completed , a condensed version was published as an essay titled " the only path to tomorrow ", in the january 1000 edition of " reader 's digest " magazine .
rand extended her involvement with free-market and anti-communist activism while working in hollywood .
she became involved with the motion picture alliance for the preservation of american ideals , a hollywood anti-communist group , and wrote articles on the group 's behalf .
she also joined the anti-communist american writers association .
a visit by isabel paterson to meet with rand 's california associates led to a final falling out between the two when paterson made comments , which rand considered rude , to valued political allies .
in 1000 , during the second red scare , rand testified as a " friendly witness " before the united states house un-american activities committee .
her testimony described the disparity between her personal experiences in the soviet union and the portrayal of it in the 1000 film " song of russia ".
rand argued that the film grossly misrepresented conditions in the soviet union , portraying life there as being much better and happier than it actually was .
she wanted to also criticize the lauded 1000 film " the best years of our lives " for what she interpreted as its negative presentation of the business world , but she was not allowed to testify about it .
when asked after the hearings about her feelings on the effectiveness of the investigations , rand described the process as " futile ".
after several delays , the film version of " the fountainhead " was released in 1000 .
although it used rand 's screenplay with minimal alterations , she " disliked the movie from beginning to end ", complaining about its editing , acting , and other elements .
in the years following the publication of " the fountainhead ", rand received numerous letters from readers , some of whom the book profoundly influenced .
in 1000 rand moved from los angeles to new york city , where she gathered a group of these admirers around her .
this group ( jokingly designated " the collective ") included future federal reserve chairman alan greenspan , a young psychology student named nathan blumenthal ( later nathaniel branden ) and his wife barbara , and barbara 's cousin leonard peikoff .
at first the group was an informal gathering of friends who met with rand on weekends at her apartment to discuss philosophy .
later she began allowing them to read the drafts of her new novel , " atlas shrugged ", as the manuscript pages were written .
in 1000 rand 's close relationship with the younger nathaniel branden turned into a romantic affair , with the consent of their spouses .
" atlas shrugged ", published in 1000 , was considered rand 's " magnum opus ".
rand described the theme of the novel as " the role of the mind in man 's existenceand , as a corollary , the demonstration of a new moral philosophy : the morality of rational self-interest ".
it advocates the core tenets of rand 's philosophy of objectivism and expresses her concept of human achievement .
the plot involves a dystopian united states in which the most creative industrialists , scientists , and artists respond to a welfare state government by going on strike and retreating to a mountainous hideaway where they build an independent free economy .
the novel 's hero and leader of the strike , john galt , describes the strike as " stopping the motor of the world " by withdrawing the minds of the individuals most contributing to the nation 's wealth and achievement .
with this fictional strike , rand intended to illustrate that without the efforts of the rational and productive , the economy would collapse and society would fall apart .
the novel includes elements of romance , mystery , and science fiction , and it contains an extended exposition of objectivism in the form of a lengthy monologue delivered by galt .
despite many negative reviews , " atlas shrugged " became an international bestseller .
in an interview with mike wallace , rand declared herself " the most creative thinker alive ".
after completing the novel , rand fell into a severe depression .
" atlas shrugged " was rand 's last completed work of fiction ; a turning point in her life , it marked the end of rand 's career as a novelist and the beginning of her role as a popular philosopher .
in 1000 , nathaniel branden established nathaniel branden lectures , later incorporated as the nathaniel branden institute ( nbi ), to promote rand 's philosophy .
collective members gave lectures for nbi and wrote articles for objectivist periodicals that she edited .
rand later published some of these articles in book form .
critics , including some former nbi students and branden himself , have described the culture of nbi as one of intellectual conformity and excessive reverence for rand , with some describing nbi or the objectivist movement itself as a cult or religion .
rand expressed opinions on a wide range of topics , from literature and music to sexuality and facial hair , and some of her followers mimicked her preferences , wearing clothes to match characters from her novels and buying furniture like hers .
however , some former nbi students believe the extent of these behaviors has been exaggerated , with the problem being concentrated among rand 's closest followers in new york .
rand was unimpressed with many of the nbi students and held them to strict standards , sometimes reacting coldly or angrily to those who disagreed with her .
throughout the 1000s and 1000s , rand developed and promoted her objectivist philosophy through her nonfiction works and by giving talks to students at institutions such as yale , princeton , columbia , harvard , and mit .
she received an honorary doctorate from lewis & clark college in 1000 .
she also began delivering annual lectures at the ford hall forum , responding afterward to questions from the audience .
during these speeches and q & a sessions , she often took controversial stances on political and social issues of the day .
these included supporting abortion rights , opposing the vietnam war and the military draft ( but condemning many draft dodgers as " bums "), supporting israel in the yom kippur war of 1000 against a coalition of arab nations as " civilized men fighting savages ", saying european colonists had the right to develop land taken from american indians , and calling homosexuality " immoral " and " disgusting ", while also advocating the repeal of all laws about it .
she also endorsed several republican candidates for president of the united states , most strongly barry goldwater in 1000 , whose candidacy she promoted in several articles for " the objectivist newsletter ".
in 1000 , nathaniel branden began an affair with the young actress patrecia scott , whom he later married .
nathaniel and barbara branden kept the affair hidden from rand .
when she learned of it in 1000 , though her romantic relationship with branden had already ended , rand terminated her relationship with both brandens , which led to the closure of nbi .
rand published an article in " the objectivist " repudiating nathaniel branden for dishonesty and other " irrational behavior in his private life ".
branden later apologized in an interview to " every student of objectivism " for " perpetuating the ayn rand mystique " and for " contributing to that dreadful atmosphere of intellectual repressiveness that pervades the objectivist movement ".
in subsequent years , rand and several more of her closest associates parted company .
rand underwent surgery for lung cancer in 1000 after decades of heavy smoking .
in 1000 , she retired from writing her newsletter and , despite her initial objections , allowed evva pryor , a social worker from her attorney 's office , to enroll her in social security and medicare .
during the late 1000s her activities within the objectivist movement declined , especially after the death of her husband on november 9 , 1000 .
one of her final projects was work on a never-completed television adaptation of " atlas shrugged ".
rand died of heart failure on march 6 , 1000 , at her home in new york city , and was interred in the kensico cemetery , valhalla , new york .
rand 's funeral was attended by some of her prominent followers , including alan greenspan .
a floral arrangement in the shape of a dollar sign was placed near her casket .
in her will , rand named leonard peikoff to inherit her estate .
rand called her philosophy " objectivism ", describing its essence as " the concept of man as a heroic being , with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life , with productive achievement as his noblest activity , and reason as his only absolute ".
she considered objectivism a systematic philosophy and laid out positions on metaphysics , epistemology , ethics , political philosophy and aesthetics .
in metaphysics , rand supported philosophical realism , and opposed anything she regarded as mysticism or supernaturalism , including all forms of religion .
in epistemology , she considered all knowledge to be based on sense perception , the validity of which she considered axiomatic , and reason , which she described as " the faculty that identifies and integrates the material provided by man 's senses ".
she rejected all claims of non-perceptual or " a priori " knowledge , including "' instinct ,' ' intuition ,' ' revelation ,' or any form of ' just knowing .
rand argued that the requirements of cognition determine the objective criteria of conceptualization , which she summarized in the form of a philosophical razor .
known as " rand 's razor ," it states that " concepts are not to be multiplied beyond necessitythe corollary of which is : nor are they to be integrated in disregard of necessity ".
in her " introduction to objectivist epistemology ", rand presented a theory of concept formation and rejected the analyticsynthetic dichotomy .
in ethics , rand argued for rational and ethical egoism ( rational self-interest ), as the guiding moral principle .
she said the individual should " exist for his own sake , neither sacrificing himself to others nor sacrificing others to himself ".
she referred to egoism as " the virtue of selfishness " in her book of that title , in which she presented her solution to the is-ought problem by describing a meta-ethical theory that based morality in the needs of " man 's survival " qua " man ".
she condemned ethical altruism as incompatible with the requirements of human life and happiness , and held that the initiation of force was evil and irrational , writing in " atlas shrugged " that " force and mind are opposites ."
rand 's political philosophy emphasized individual rights ( including property rights ), and she considered " laissez-faire " capitalism the only moral social system because in her view it was the only system based on the protection of those rights .
she opposed statism , which she understood to include theocracy , absolute monarchy , nazism , fascism , communism , democratic socialism , and dictatorship .
rand believed that natural rights should be enforced by a constitutionally limited government .
although her political views are often classified as conservative or libertarian , she preferred the term " radical for capitalism ".
she worked with conservatives on political projects , but disagreed with them over issues such as religion and ethics .
she denounced libertarianism , which she associated with anarchism .
she rejected anarchism as a nave theory based in subjectivism that could only lead to collectivism in practice .
in aesthetics , rand defined art as a " selective re-creation of reality according to an artist 's metaphysical value-judgments ".
according to her , art allows philosophical concepts to be presented in a concrete form that can be easily grasped , thereby fulfilling a need of human consciousness .
as a writer , the art form rand focused on most closely was literature , where she considered romanticism to be the approach that most accurately reflected the existence of human free will .
she described her own approach to literature as " romantic realism ".
rand acknowledged aristotle as her greatest influence and remarked that in the history of philosophy she could only recommend " three a 's " aristotle , aquinas , and ayn rand .
in a 1000 interview with mike wallace , when asked where her philosophy came from , she responded , " out of my own mind , with the sole acknowledgement of a debt to aristotle , the only philosopher who ever influenced me .
i devised the rest of my philosophy myself ."
however , she also found early inspiration in friedrich nietzsche , and scholars have found indications of his influence in early notes from rand 's journals , in passages from the first edition of " we the living " ( which rand later revised ), and in her overall writing style .
however , by the time she wrote " the fountainhead ", rand had turned against nietzsche 's ideas , and the extent of his influence on her even during her early years is disputed .
among the philosophers rand held in particular disdain was immanuel kant , whom she referred to as a " monster ", although philosophers george walsh and fred seddon have argued that she misinterpreted kant and exaggerated their differences .
rand said her most important contributions to philosophy were her " theory of concepts , [ her ] ethics , and [ her ] discovery in politics that evilthe violation of rightsconsists of the initiation of force ".
she believed epistemology was a foundational branch of philosophy and considered the advocacy of reason to be the single most significant aspect of her philosophy , stating , " i am not " primarily " an advocate of capitalism , but of egoism ; and i am not " primarily " an advocate of egoism , but of reason .
if one recognizes the supremacy of reason and applies it consistently , all the rest follows ."
during rand 's lifetime , her work evoked both extreme praise and condemnation .
rand 's first novel , " we the living ", was admired by the literary critic h . l . mencken , her broadway play " night of january 10th " was both a critical and popular success , and " the fountainhead " was hailed by a reviewer in " the new york times " as " masterful ".
rand 's novels were derided by some critics when they were first published as being long and melodramatic .
however , they became bestsellers largely through word of mouth .
the first reviews rand received were for " night of january 10th ".
reviews of the production were largely positive , but rand considered even positive reviews to be embarrassing because of significant changes made to her script by the producer .
rand believed that her first novel , " we the living ", was not widely reviewed , but rand scholar michael s . berliner says " it was the most reviewed of any of her works ", with approximately 100 different reviews being published in more than 200 publications .
overall these reviews were more positive than the reviews she received for her later work .
her 1000 novella " anthem " received little attention from reviewers , both for its first publication in england and for subsequent re-issues .
rand 's first bestseller , " the fountainhead ", received far fewer reviews than " we the living ", and reviewers ' opinions were mixed .
there was a positive review in " the new york times " that rand greatly appreciated .
the reviewer called rand " a writer of great power " who wrote " brilliantly , beautifully and bitterly ", and stated that " you will not be able to read this masterful book without thinking through some of the basic concepts of our time ".
there were other positive reviews , but rand dismissed most of them as either not understanding her message or as being from unimportant publications .
some negative reviews focused on the length of the novel , such as one that called it " a whale of a book " and another that said " anyone who is taken in by it deserves a stern lecture on paper-rationing ".
other negative reviews called the characters unsympathetic and rand 's style " offensively pedestrian ".
rand 's 1000 novel " atlas shrugged " was widely reviewed , and many of the reviews were strongly negative .
in the " national review ", conservative author whittaker chambers called the book " sophomoric " and " remarkably silly ".
he described the tone of the book as " shrillness without reprieve " and accused rand of supporting a godless system ( which he related to that of the soviets ), claiming " from almost any page of " atlas shrugged ", a voice can be heard , from painful necessity , commanding : ' to a gas chambergo !
" atlas shrugged " received positive reviews from a few publications , including praise from the noted book reviewer john chamberlain , but rand scholar mimi reisel gladstein later wrote that " reviewers seemed to vie with each other in a contest to devise the cleverest put-downs ", calling it " execrable claptrap " and " a nightmare "; they said it was " written out of hate " and showed " remorseless hectoring and prolixity ".
author flannery o ' connor wrote in a letter to a friend that " the fiction of ayn rand is as low as you can get re fiction .
i hope you picked it up off the floor of the subway and threw it in the nearest garbage pail ."
rand 's nonfiction received far fewer reviews than her novels had .
the tenor of the criticism for her first nonfiction book , " for the new intellectual ", was similar to that for " atlas shrugged ", with philosopher sidney hook likening her certainty to " the way philosophy is written in the soviet union ", and author gore vidal calling her viewpoint " nearly perfect in its immorality ".
her subsequent books got progressively less attention from reviewers .
on the 100th anniversary of rand 's birth in 2000 , edward rothstein , writing for " the new york times ", referred to her fictional writing as quaint utopian " retro fantasy " and programmatic neo-romanticism of the misunderstood artist , while criticizing her characters ' " isolated rejection of democratic society ".
in 2000 , book critic leslie clark described her fiction as " romance novels with a patina of pseudo-philosophy ".
in 2000 , " gq " s critic columnist tom carson described her books as " capitalism 's version of middlebrow religious novels " such as "" and the " left behind " series .
in 1000 , a survey conducted for the library of congress and the book-of-the - month club asked club members what the most influential book in the respondent 's life was .
rand 's " atlas shrugged " was the second most popular choice , after the bible .
rand 's books continue to be widely sold and read , with over 20million copies sold as of 2000 ( with about 10 % of that total purchased for free distribution to schools by the ayn rand institute ).
in 1000 , modern library readers voted " atlas shrugged " the 20th century 's finest work of fiction , followed by " the fountainhead " in second place , " anthem " in seventh , and " we the living " eighth ; none of the four appeared on the critics ' list .
although rand 's influence has been greatest in the united states , there has been international interest in her work .
rand 's work continues to be among the top sellers among books in india .
rand 's contemporary admirers included fellow novelists , such as ira levin , kay nolte smith and l . neil smith , and later writers such as erika holzer and terry goodkind have been influenced by her .
other artists who have cited rand as an important influence on their lives and thought include comic book artist steve ditko and musician neil peart of rush .
rand provided a positive view of business , and in response business executives and entrepreneurs have admired and promoted her work .
john allison of bb & t and ed snider of comcast spectacor have funded the promotion of rand 's ideas , while mark cuban , owner of the dallas mavericks , and john p . mackey , ceo of whole foods , among others , have said they consider rand crucial to their success .
rand and her works have been referred to in a variety of media : on television shows including animated sitcoms , live-action comedies , dramas , and game shows , as well as in movies and video games .
she , or a character based on her , figures prominently ( in positive and negative lights ) in literary and science fiction novels by prominent american authors .
nick gillespie , editor in chief of " reason ", has remarked that " rand 's is a tortured immortality , one in which she 's as likely to be a punch line as a protagonist ..." and that " jibes at rand as cold and inhuman , run through the popular culture ".
two movies have been made about rand 's life .
a 1000 documentary film , "", was nominated for the academy award for documentary feature .
" the passion of ayn rand ", a 1000 television adaptation of the book of the same name , won several awards .
rand 's image also appears on a 1000 u . s . postage stamp illustrated by artist nick gaetano .
although she rejected the labels " conservative " and " libertarian ", rand has had continuing influence on right-wing politics and libertarianism .
jim powell , a senior fellow at the cato institute , considers rand one of the three most important women ( along with rose wilder lane and isabel paterson ) of modern american libertarianism , and david nolan , one of the founders of the libertarian party , stated that " without ayn rand , the libertarian movement would not exist ".
in his history of the libertarian movement , journalist brian doherty described her as " the most influential libertarian of the twentieth century to the public at large ", and biographer jennifer burns referred to her as " the ultimate gateway drug to life on the right ".
she faced intense opposition from william f . buckley , jr . and other contributors for the " national review " magazine .
they published numerous criticisms in the 1000s and 1000s by whittaker chambers , garry wills , and m . stanton evans .
nevertheless , her influence among conservatives forced buckley and other " national review " contributors to reconsider how traditional notions of virtue and christianity could be integrated with support for capitalism .
the political figures who cite rand as an influence are usually conservatives ( often members of the united states republican party ), despite rand taking some positions that are atypical for conservatives , such as being pro-choice and an atheist .
a 1000 article in " the new york times " referred to her as the reagan administration 's " novelist laureate ".
republican congressmen and conservative pundits have acknowledged her influence on their lives and recommended her novels .
the financial crisis of 20000000 spurred renewed interest in her works , especially " atlas shrugged ", which some saw as foreshadowing the crisis , and opinion articles compared real-world events with the plot of the novel .
during this time , signs mentioning rand and her fictional hero john galt appeared at tea party protests .
there was also increased criticism of her ideas , especially from the political left , with critics blaming the economic crisis on her support of selfishness and free markets , particularly through her influence on alan greenspan .
for example , " mother jones " remarked that " rand 's particular genius has always been her ability to turn upside down traditional hierarchies and recast the wealthy , the talented , and the powerful as the oppressed ", while equating randian individual well-being with that of the " volk " according to goebbels .
corey robin of " the nation " alleged similarities between the " moral syntax of randianism " and fascism .
during rand 's lifetime her work received little attention from academic scholars .
when the first academic book about rand 's philosophy appeared in 1000 , its author declared writing about rand " a treacherous undertaking " that could lead to " guilt by association " for taking her seriously .
a few articles about rand 's ideas appeared in academic journals before her death in 1000 , many of them in " the personalist ".
one of these was " on the randian argument " by libertarian philosopher robert nozick , who argued that her meta-ethical argument is unsound and fails to solve the isought problem posed by david hume .
some responses to nozick by other academic philosophers were also published in " the personalist " arguing that nozick misstated rand 's case .
academic consideration of rand as a literary figure during her life was even more limited .
academic mimi gladstein was unable to find any scholarly articles about rand 's novels when she began researching her in 1000 , and only three such articles appeared during the rest of the 1000s .
since rand 's death , interest in her work has gradually increased .
historian jennifer burns has identified " three overlapping waves " of scholarly interest in rand , the most recent of which is " an explosion of scholarship " since the year 2000 .
however , few universities currently include rand or objectivism as a philosophical specialty or research area , with many literature and philosophy departments dismissing her as a pop culture phenomenon rather than a subject for serious study .
gladstein , chris matthew sciabarra , allan gotthelf , edwin a . locke and tara smith have taught her work in academic institutions .
sciabarra co-edits the " journal of ayn rand studies ", a nonpartisan peer-reviewed journal dedicated to the study of rand 's philosophical and literary work .
in 1000 gotthelf helped found the ayn rand society with george walsh and david kelley , and has been active in sponsoring seminars about rand and her ideas .
smith has written several academic books and papers on rand 's ideas , including " ayn rand 's normative ethics : the virtuous egoist ", a volume on rand 's ethical theory published by cambridge university press .
rand 's ideas have also been made subjects of study at clemson and duke universities .
scholars of english and american literature have largely ignored her work , although attention to her literary work has increased since the 1000s .
rand scholars douglas den uyl and douglas b . rasmussen , while stressing the importance and originality of her thought , describe her style as " literary , hyperbolic and emotional ".
philosopher jack wheeler says that despite " the incessant bombast and continuous venting of randian rage ", rand 's ethics are " a most immense achievement , the study of which is vastly more fruitful than any other in contemporary thought ".
in the " literary encyclopedia " entry for rand written in 2000 , john david lewis declared that " rand wrote the most intellectually challenging fiction of her generation ".
in a 1000 interview in the " chronicle of higher education ", sciabarra commented , " i know they laugh at rand ", while forecasting a growth of interest in her work in the academic community .
libertarian philosopher michael huemer has argued that very few people find rand 's ideas convincing , especially her ethics , which he believes is difficult to interpret and may lack logical coherence .
he attributes the attention she receives to her being a " compelling writer ", especially as a novelist .
thus , " atlas shrugged " outsells rand 's non-fiction works , as well as the works of other philosophers of classical liberalism such as ludwig von mises , friedrich hayek , or frederic bastiat .
political scientist charles murray , while praising rand 's literary accomplishments , criticizes her claim that her only " philosophical debt " was to aristotle , instead asserting that her ideas were derivative of previous thinkers such as john locke and friedrich nietzsche .
although rand maintained that objectivism was an integrated philosophical system , philosopher robert h . bass has argued that her central ethical ideas are inconsistent and contradictory to her central political ideas .
in 1000 , rand 's intellectual heir leonard peikoff established the ayn rand institute , a nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting rand 's ideas and works .
in 1000 , after an ideological disagreement with peikoff , philosopher david kelley founded the institute for objectivist studies , now known as the atlas society .
in 2000 , historian john mccaskey organized the anthem foundation for objectivist scholarship , which provides grants for scholarly work on objectivism in academia .
the charitable foundation of bb & t corporation has also given grants for teaching rand 's ideas or works .
the university of texas at austin , the university of pittsburgh , and university of north carolina at chapel hill are among the schools that have received grants .
in some cases , these grants have been controversial due to their requiring research or teaching related to rand .
novels :
other fiction :
non-fiction: alain connes
alain connes (; born 1 april 1000 ) is a french mathematician , currently professor at the collge de france , ihs , ohio state university and vanderbilt university .
he was an invited professor at the conservatoire national des arts et mtiers ( 2000 ).
alain connes studies operator algebras .
in his early work on von neumann algebras in the 1000s , he succeeded in obtaining the almost complete classification of injective factors .
following this he made contributions in operator k-theory and index theory , which culminated in the baumconnes conjecture .
he also introduced cyclic cohomology in the early 1000s as a first step in the study of noncommutative differential geometry .
he was a member of bourbaki .
connes has applied his work in areas of mathematics and theoretical physics , including number theory , differential geometry and particle physics .
connes was awarded the fields medal in 1000 , the crafoord prize in 2000 and the gold medal of the cnrs in 2000 .
he was an invited speaker at the icm in 1000 at vancouver and in 1000 at berkeley and a plenary speaker at the icm in 1000 at helsinki .
he is a member of the french academy of sciences and several foreign academies and societies , including the danish academy of sciences , norwegian academy of sciences , russian academy of sciences , and us national academy of sciences .
allan dwan
allan dwan ( 3 april 1000 20 december 1000 ) was a pioneering canadian-born american motion picture director , producer and screenwriter .
born joseph aloysius dwan in toronto , ontario , canada , dwan , was the younger son of commercial traveller of woolen clothing joseph michael dwan ( 10000000 ) and his wife mary jane dwan , " ne " hunt .
the family moved to the united states when he was seven years old , on 4 december 1000 , by ferry from windsor to detroit , according to his naturalization petition of august 1000 .
his elder brother , leo garnet dwan ( 10000000 ), became a physician .
at the university of notre dame , allan dwan studied engineering and began working for a lighting company in chicago .
however , he had a strong interest in the fledgling motion picture industry and when essanay studios offered him the opportunity to become a scriptwriter , he took the job .
at that time , some of the east coast movie makers began to spend winters in california where the climate allowed them to continue productions requiring warm weather .
soon , a number of movie companies worked there year-round and , in 1000 , dwan began working part-time in hollywood .
while still in new york , in 1000 he was the founding president of the east coast chapter of the motion picture directors association .
dwan operated flying a studios in la mesa , california from august 1000 to july 1000 .
flying a was one of the first motion pictures studios in california history .
on 10 august 2000 , a plaque was unveiled on the wolff building at third avenue and la mesa boulevard commemorating dwan and the flying a studios origins in la mesa , california .
after making a series of westerns and comedies , dwan directed fellow canadian-american mary pickford in several very successful movies as well as her husband , douglas fairbanks , notably in the acclaimed 1000 " robin hood ".
dwan directed gloria swanson in eight feature films , and one short film made in the short-lived sound-on-film process phonofilm .
this short , also featuring thomas meighan and henri de la falaise , was produced as a joke , for the 20 april 1000 " lambs ' gambol " for the lambs , with the film showing swanson crashing the all-male club .
following the introduction of the talkies , dwan directed child-star shirley temple in " heidi " ( 1000 ) and " rebecca of sunnybrook farm " ( 1000 ).
dwan helped launch the career of two other successful hollywood directors , victor fleming , who went on to direct " the wizard of oz " and " gone with the wind ", and marshall neilan , who became an actor , director , writer and producer .
over a long career spanning almost 50 years , dwan directed 100 motion pictures , some of which were highly acclaimed , such as the 1000 box office hit , " sands of iwo jima ".
he directed his last movie in 1000 .
he died in los angeles at the age of ninety-six , and is interred in the san fernando mission cemetery , mission hills , california .
dwan has a star on the hollywood walk of fame at 6000 hollywood boulevard .
print ebook algeria
algeria ( '; , '; ), officially the people 's democratic republic of algeria , is a sovereign state in north africa on the mediterranean coast .
its capital and most populous city is algiers , located in the country 's far north .
with an area of , algeria is the tenth-largest country in the world , and the largest in africa .
algeria is bordered to the northeast by tunisia , to the east by libya , to the west by morocco , to the southwest by the western saharan territory , mauritania , and mali , to the southeast by niger , and to the north by the mediterranean sea .
the country is a semi-presidential republic consisting of 40 provinces and 1 , 500 communes ( counties ).
abdelaziz bouteflika has been president since 1000 .
ancient algeria has known many empires and dynasties , including ancient numidians , phoenicians , carthaginians , romans , vandals , byzantines , umayyads , abbasids , idrisid , aghlabid , rustamid , fatimids , zirid , hammadids , almoravids , almohads , spaniards , ottomans and the french colonial empire .
berbers are the indigenous inhabitants of algeria .
algeria is a regional and middle power .
the north african country supplies large amounts of natural gas to europe , and energy exports are the backbone of the economy .
according to opec algeria has the 10th largest oil reserves in the world and the second largest in africa , while it has the 9th largest reserves of natural gas .
sonatrach , the national oil company , is the largest company in africa .
algeria has one of the largest militaries in africa and the largest defence budget on the continent ; most of algeria 's weapons are imported from russia , with whom they are a close ally .
algeria is a member of the african union , the arab league , opec , the united nations and is the founding member of the maghreb union .
the country 's name derives from the city of algiers .
the city 's name in turn derives from the arabic ' (, " the islands "), a truncated form of the older ' (, " islands of the mazghanna tribe "), employed by medieval geographers such as al-idrisi .
in the region of ain hanech ( sada province ), early remnants ( 200 , 000 bc ) of hominid occupation in north africa were found .
neanderthal tool makers produced hand axes in the levalloisian and mousterian styles ( 40 , 000 bc ) similar to those in the levant .
algeria was the site of the highest state of development of middle paleolithic flake tool techniques .
tools of this era , starting about 30 , 000 bc , are called aterian ( after the archeological site of bir el ater , south of tebessa ).
the earliest blade industries in north africa are called iberomaurusian ( located mainly in the oran region ).
this industry appears to have spread throughout the coastal regions of the maghreb between 10 , 000 and 10 , 000 bc .
neolithic civilization ( animal domestication and agriculture ) developed in the saharan and mediterranean maghreb perhaps as early as 10 , 000 bc or as late as between 6000 and 2000 bc .
this life , richly depicted in the tassili n ' ajjer paintings , predominated in algeria until the classical period .
the amalgam of peoples of north africa coalesced eventually into a distinct native population that came to be called berbers , who are the indigenous peoples of northern africa .
from their principal center of power at carthage , the carthaginians expanded and established small settlements along the north african coast ; by 600 bc , a phoenician presence existed at tipasa , east of cherchell , hippo regius ( modern annaba ) and rusicade ( modern skikda ).
these settlements served as market towns as well as anchorages .
as carthaginian power grew , its impact on the indigenous population increased dramatically .
berber civilization was already at a stage in which agriculture , manufacturing , trade , and political organization supported several states .
trade links between carthage and the berbers in the interior grew , but territorial expansion also resulted in the enslavement or military recruitment of some berbers and in the extraction of tribute from others .
by the early 4th century bc , berbers formed the single largest element of the carthaginian army .
in the revolt of the mercenaries , berber soldiers rebelled from 200 to 200 bc after being unpaid following the defeat of carthage in the first punic war .
they succeeded in obtaining control of much of carthage 's north african territory , and they minted coins bearing the name libyan , used in greek to describe natives of north africa .
the carthaginian state declined because of successive defeats by the romans in the punic wars .
in 100 bc the city of carthage was destroyed .
as carthaginian power waned , the influence of berber leaders in the hinterland grew .
by the 2nd century bc , several large but loosely administered berber kingdoms had emerged .
two of them were established in numidia , behind the coastal areas controlled by carthage .
west of numidia lay mauretania , which extended across the moulouya river in modern-day morocco to the atlantic ocean .
the high point of berber civilization , unequaled until the coming of the almohads and almoravids more than a millennium later , was reached during the reign of masinissa in the 2nd century bc .
after masinissa 's death in 100 bc , the berber kingdoms were divided and reunited several times .
masinissa 's line survived until 20 ad , when the remaining berber territory was annexed to the roman empire .
for several centuries algeria was ruled by the romans , who founded many colonies in the region .
like the rest of north africa , algeria was one of the breadbaskets of the empire , exporting cereals and other agricultural products .
saint augustine was the bishop of hippo regius ( modern-day algeria ), located in the roman province of africa .
the germanic vandals of geiseric moved into north africa in 400 , and by 400 controlled coastal numidia .
they did not make any significant settlement on the land , as they were harassed by local tribes .
in fact , by the time the byzantines arrived lepcis magna was abandoned and the msellata region was occupied by the indigenous laguatan who had been busy facilitating an amazigh political , military and cultural revival .
after negligible resistance from the locals , muslim arabs of the umayyad caliphate conquered algeria in the mid-7th century and a large number of the indigenous people converted to the newly founded faith of islam .
after the fall of the umayyad caliphate , numerous local dynasties emerged , including the aghlabids , almohads , abdalwadid , zirids , rustamids , hammadids , almoravids and the fatimids .
during the middle ages , north africa was home to many great scholars , saints and sovereigns including judah ibn quraysh the first grammarian to suggest the afroasiatic language family , the great sufi masters sidi boumediene ( abu madyan ) and sidi el houari , as well as the emirs abd al mu ' min and yghmrasen .
it was during this time period that the fatimids or children of fatima , daughter of muhammad , came to the maghreb .
these " fatimids " went on to found a long lasting dynasty stretching across the maghreb , hejaz and the levant , boasting a secular inner government , as well as a powerful army and navy , primarily made of arabs and levantians extending from algeria to their capital state of cairo .
the fatimid caliphate began to collapse when its governors the zirids seceded .
in order to punish them the fatimids sent the arab banu hilal and banu sulaym against them .
the resultant war is recounted in the epic tghribt .
in al-tghrbt the amazigh zirid hero khlf al-znat asks daily , for duels , to defeat the hilalan hero bu zayd al-hilal and many other arab knights in a string of victories .
the zirids , however , were ultimately defeated ushering in an adoption of arab customs and culture .
the indigenous amazigh tribes , however , remained largely independent , and depending on tribe , location and time controlled varying parts of the maghreb , at times unifying it ( as under the fatimids ).
the fatimid islamic state , also known as fatimid caliphate made an islamic empire that included north africa , sicily , palestine , jordan , lebanon , syria , egypt , the red sea coast of africa , tihamah , hejaz and yemen .
caliphates from northern africa traded with the other empires of their time , as well as forming part of a confederated support and trade network with other islamic states during the islamic era .
the amazighs historically consisted of several tribes .
the two main branches were the botr and barns tribes , who were divided into tribes , and again into sub-tribes .
each region of the maghreb contained several tribes ( for example , sanhadja , houara , zenata , masmouda , kutama , awarba , and berghwata ).
all these tribes made independent territorial decisions .
several amazigh dynasties emerged during the middle ages in the maghreb and other nearby lands .
ibn khaldun provides a table summarising the amazigh dynasties of the maghreb region , the zirid , banu ifran , maghrawa , almoravid , hammadid , almohad , merinid , abdalwadid , wattasid , meknassa and hafsid dynasties .
in the early 10th century , spain constructed fortified outposts ( presidios ) on or near the algerian coast .
spain took control of few coastal towns like mers el kebir in 1000 ; oran in 1000 ; and tlemcen , mostaganem and tns in 1000 .
in the same year , a few merchants of algiers ceded one of the rocky islets in their harbour to spain , which built a fort on it .
the presidios in north africa turned out to be a costly and largely ineffective military endeavour that did not guarantee access for spain 's merchant fleet .
there reigned in ifriqiya , current tunisia , a berber family , zirid , somehow recognising the suzerainty of the fatimid caliph of cairo .
probably in 1000 , the zirid ruler or viceroy , el-mu ' izz , decided to end this suzerainty .
the fatimid state was too weak to attempt a punitive expedition ; the viceroy , el-mu ' izz , also found another means of revenge .
between the nile and the red sea were living bedouin tribes expelled from arabia for their disruption and turbulent influence , both banu hilal and banu sulaym among others , whose presence disrupted farmers in the nile valley since the nomads would often loot .
the then fatimid vizier devised to relinquish control of the maghreb and obtained the agreement of his sovereign .
this not only prompted the bedouins to leave , but the fatimid treasury even gave them a light expatriation cash allowance .
whole tribes set off with women , children , ancestors , animals and camping equipment .
some stopped on the way , especially in cyrenaica , where they are still one of the essential elements of the settlement but most arrived in ifriqiya by the gabes region .
the zirid ruler tried to stop this rising tide , but each meeting , the last under the walls of kairouan , his troops were defeated and arabs remained masters of the field .
the flood was still rising , and in 1000 the arabs spread on the high plains of constantine where they gradually choked qalaa of banu hammad , as they had done kairouan few decades ago .
from there they gradually gained the upper algiers and oran plains .
some were forcibly taken by the almohads in the second half of the 10th century .
we can say that in the 10th century there were in all of north africa , with the exception of the main mountain ranges and certain coastal regions remained entirely berber .
the region of algeria was partially ruled by ottomans for three centuries from 1000 to 1000 .
in 1000 the turkish privateer brothers aruj and hayreddin barbarossa , who operated successfully under the hafsids , moved their base of operations to algiers .
they succeeded in conquering jijel and algiers from the spaniards but eventually assumed control over the city and the surrounding region , forcing the previous ruler , abu hamo musa iii of the " bani ziyad " dynasty , to flee .
when aruj was killed in 1000 during his invasion of tlemcen , hayreddin succeeded him as military commander of algiers .
the ottoman sultan gave him the title of beylerbey and a contingent of some 2 , 000 janissaries .
with the aid of this force , hayreddin conquered the whole area between constantine and oran ( although the city of oran remained in spanish hands until 1000 ).
the next beylerbey was hayreddin 's son hasan , who assumed the position in 1000 .
until 1000 the area was governed by officers who served terms with no fixed limits .
subsequently , with the institution of a regular ottoman administration , governors with the title of pasha ruled for three-year terms .
the pasha was assisted by janissaries , known in algeria as the ojaq and led by an agha .
discontent among the ojaq rose in the mid-1000s because they were not paid regularly , and they repeatedly revolted against the pasha .
as a result , the agha charged the pasha with corruption and incompetence and seized power in 1000 .
plague had repeatedly struck the cities of north africa .
algiers lost from 30 , 000 to 50 , 000 inhabitants to the plague in 100000 , and suffered high fatalities in 100000 , 1000 , 1000 and 100000 .
in 1000 , the taifa rebelled , killed the agha , and placed one of its own in power .
the new leader received the title of dey .
after 1000 , the right to select the dey passed to the divan , a council of some sixty nobles .
it was at first dominated by the " ojaq "; but by the 10th century , it had become the dey 's instrument .
in 1000 , the dey persuaded the sultan to recognise him and his successors as regent , replacing the pasha in that role , although algiers remained a part of the ottoman empire .
the dey was in effect a constitutional autocrat .
the dey was elected for a life term , but in the 100 years ( 10000000 ) that the system survived , fourteen of the twenty-nine deys were assassinated .
despite usurpation , military coups and occasional mob rule , the day-to-day operation of ottoman government was remarkably orderly .
although the regency patronised the tribal chieftains , it never had the unanimous allegiance of the countryside , where heavy taxation frequently provoked unrest .
autonomous tribal states were tolerated , and the regency 's authority was seldom applied in the kabylie .
the barbary pirates preyed on christian and other non-islamic shipping in the western mediterranean sea .
the pirates often took the passengers and crew on the ships and sold them or used them as slaves .
they also did a brisk business in ransoming some of the captives .
according to robert davis , from the 10th to 10th century , pirates captured 1 million to 1 . 20 million europeans as slaves .
they often made raids , called razzias , on european coastal towns to capture christian slaves to sell at slave markets in north africa and the ottoman empire .
in 1000 , hayreddin captured the island of ischia , taking 4 , 000 prisoners , and enslaved some 9 , 000 inhabitants of lipari , almost the entire population .
in 1000 , turgut reis enslaved the entire population of the maltese island of gozo , between 5 , 000 and 6 , 000 , sending the captives to libya .
in 1000 , pirates sacked vieste in southern italy and took an estimated 7 , 000 captives as slaves .
in 1000 , barbary corsairs captured the town of ciutadella ( minorca ), destroyed it , slaughtered the inhabitants and took 3 , 000 survivors as slaves to istanbul .
barbary pirates often attacked the balearic islands , and in response , the residents built many coastal watchtowers and fortified churches .
the threat was so severe that residents abandoned the island of formentera .
between 1000 and 1000 , england lost 400 merchant ships to barbary pirates .
in july 1000 two pirate ships from algiers sailed as far as iceland , raiding and capturing slaves .
two weeks earlier another pirate ship from sal in morocco had also raided in iceland .
some of the slaves brought to algiers were later ransomed back to iceland , but some chose to stay in algeria .
in 1000 pirate ships from algeria raided the faroe islands .
in the 10th century , the pirates forged affiliations with caribbean powers , paying a " licence tax " in exchange for safe harbour of their vessels .
one american slave reported that the algerians had enslaved 100 american seamen in the mediterranean and atlantic from 1000 to 1000 .
piracy on american vessels in the mediterranean resulted in the united states initiating the first ( 10000000 ) and second barbary wars ( 1000 ).
following those wars , algeria was weaker and europeans , with an anglo-dutch fleet commanded by the british lord exmouth , attacked algiers .
after a nine-hour bombardment , they obtained a treaty from the dey that reaffirmed the conditions imposed by captain ( later commodore ) stephen decatur ( u . s . navy ) concerning the demands of tributes .
in addition , the dey agreed to end the practice of enslaving christians .
under the pretext of a slight to their consul , the french invaded and captured algiers in 1000 .
algerine slave trade and piracy ceased when the french conquered algiers .
the conquest of algeria by the french took some time and resulted in considerable bloodshed .
a combination of violence and disease epidemics caused the indigenous algerian population to decline by nearly one-third from 1000 to 1000 .
historian ben kiernan wrote on the french conquest of algeria : " by 1000 , the french conquest was complete .
the war had killed approximately 800 , 000 indigenous algerians since 1000 ."
the population of algeria , which stood at about 1 . 5 million in 1000 , reached nearly 10 million in 1000 .
french policy was predicated on " civilising " the country .
during this period , a small but influential french-speaking indigenous elite was formed , made up of berbers , mostly kabyles .
as a consequence , french government favored the kabyles .
about 80 % of indigenous schools were constructed for kabyles .
from 1000 until independence , france administered the whole mediterranean region of algeria as an integral part and " dpartement " of the nation .
one of france 's longest-held overseas territories , algeria became a destination for hundreds of thousands of european immigrants , who became known as " colons " and later , as " pied-noirs ."
between 1000 and 1000 , 50 , 000 french people emigrated to algeria .
these settlers benefited from the french government 's confiscation of communal land from tribal peoples , and the application of modern agricultural techniques that increased the amount of arable land .
many europeans settled in oran and algiers , and by the early 20th century they formed a majority of the population in both cities .
during the late 10th and early 20th century ; the european share was almost a fifth of the population .
the french government aimed at making algeria an assimilated part of france , and this included substantial educational investments especially after 1000 .
the indigenous cultural and religious resistance heavily opposed this tendency , but in contrast to the other colonised countries ' path in central asia and caucasus , algeria kept its individual skills and a relatively human-capital intensive agriculture .
gradually , dissatisfaction among the muslim population , which lacked political and economic status in the colonial system , gave rise to demands for greater political autonomy and eventually independence from france .
in may 1000 , the uprising against the occupying french forces was suppressed through what is now known as the stif and guelma massacre .
tensions between the two population groups came to a head in 1000 , when the first violent events of what was later called the algerian war began .
historians have estimated that between 30 , 000 and 100 , 000 harkis and their dependents were killed by the front de libration nationale ( fln ) or by lynch mobs in algeria .
the fln used hit and run attacks in algeria and france as part of its war , and the french conducted severe reprisals .
the war led to the death of hundreds of thousands of algerians and hundreds of thousands of injuries .
historians , like alistair horne and raymond aron , state that the actual number of algerian muslim war dead was far greater than the original fln and official french estimates but was less than the 1million deaths claimed by the algerian government after independence .
horne estimated algerian casualties during the span of eight years to be around 700 , 000 .
the war uprooted more than 2million algerians .
the war against french rule concluded in 1000 , when algeria gained complete independence following the march 1000 evian agreements and the july 1000 self-determination referendum .
the number of european " pied-noirs " who fled algeria totaled more than 900 , 000 between 1000 and 1000 .
the exodus to mainland france accelerated after the oran massacre of 1000 , in which hundreds of militants entered european sections of the city , and began attacking civilians .
algeria 's first president was the front de libration nationale ( fln ) leader ahmed ben bella .
morocco 's claim to portions of western algeria led to the sand war in 1000 .
ben bella was overthrown in 1000 by houari boumediene , his former ally and defence minister .
under ben bella , the government had become increasingly socialist and authoritarian ; boumdienne continued this trend .
but , he relied much more on the army for his support , and reduced the sole legal party to a symbolic role .
he collectivised agriculture and launched a massive industrialization drive .
oil extraction facilities were nationalised .
this was especially beneficial to the leadership after the international 1000 oil crisis .
in the 1000s and 1000s under president houari boumediene , algeria pursued a program of industrialization within a state-controlled socialist economy .
boumediene 's successor , chadli bendjedid , introduced some liberal economic reforms .
he promoted a policy of arabisation in algerian society and public life .
teachers of arabic , brought in from other muslim countries , spread conventional islamic thought in schools and sowed the seeds of a return to orthodox islam .
the algerian economy became increasingly dependent on oil , leading to hardship when the price collapsed during the 1000s oil glut .
economic recession caused by the crash in world oil prices resulted in algerian social unrest during the 1000s ; by the end of the decade , bendjedid introduced a multi-party system .
political parties developed , such as the islamic salvation front ( fis ), a broad coalition of muslim groups .
in december 1000 the islamic salvation front dominated the first of two rounds of legislative elections .
fearing the election of an islamist government , the authorities intervened on 10 january 1000 , cancelling the elections .
bendjedid resigned and a high council of state was installed to act as presidency .
it banned the fis , triggering a civil insurgency between the front 's armed wing , the armed islamic group , and the national armed forces , in which more than 100 , 000 people are thought to have died .
the islamist militants conducted a violent campaign of civilian massacres .
at several points in the conflict , the situation in algeria became a point of international concern , most notably during the crisis surrounding air france flight 8000 , a hijacking perpetrated by the armed islamic group .
the armed islamic group declared a ceasefire in october 1000 .
algeria held elections in 1000 , considered biased by international observers and most opposition groups which were won by president abdelaziz bouteflika .
he worked to restore political stability to the country and announced a ' civil concord ' initiative , approved in a referendum , under which many political prisoners were pardoned , and several thousand members of armed groups were granted exemption from prosecution under a limited amnesty , in force until 10 january 2000 .
the ais disbanded and levels of insurgent violence fell rapidly .
the groupe salafiste pour la prdication et le combat ( gspc ), a splinter group of the group islamic arme , continued a terrorist campaign against the government .
bouteflika was re-elected in the april 2000 presidential election after campaigning on a programme of national reconciliation .
the programme comprised economic , institutional , political and social reform to modernise the country , raise living standards , and tackle the causes of alienation .
it also included a second amnesty initiative , the charter for peace and national reconciliation , which was approved in a referendum in september 2000 .
it offered amnesty to most guerrillas and government security forces .
in november 2000 , the algerian constitution was amended following a vote in parliament , removing the two-term limit on presidential incumbents .
this change enabled bouteflika to stand for re-election in the 2000 presidential elections , and he was re-elected in april 2000 .
during his election campaign and following his re-election , bouteflika promised to extend the programme of national reconciliation and a $ 100-billion spending programme to create three million new jobs , the construction of one million new housing units , and to continue public sector and infrastructure modernisation programmes .
a continuing series of protests throughout the country started on 20 december 2000 , inspired by similar protests across the middle east and north africa .
on 20 february 2000 , the government lifted algeria 's 10-year-old state of emergency .
the government enacted legislation dealing with political parties , the electoral code , and the representation of women in elected bodies .
in april 2000 , bouteflika promised further constitutional and political reform .
however , elections are routinely criticized by opposition groups as unfair and international human rights groups say that media censorship and harassment of political opponents continue .
algeria is the largest country in africa , the arab world , and the mediterranean basin .
its southern part includes a significant portion of the sahara .
to the north , the tell atlas form with the saharan atlas , further south , two parallel sets of reliefs in approaching eastbound , and between which are inserted vast plains and highlands .
both atlas tend to merge in eastern algeria .
the vast mountain ranges of aures and nememcha occupy the entire northeastern algeria and are delineated by the tunisian border .
the highest point is mount tahat ( m ).
algeria lies mostly between latitudes 10 and 30n ( a small area is north of 30 ), and longitudes 9w and 10e .
most of the coastal area is hilly , sometimes even mountainous , and there are a few natural harbours .
the area from the coast to the tell atlas is fertile .
south of the tell atlas is a steppe landscape ending with the saharan atlas ; farther south , there is the sahara desert .
the ahaggar mountains (), also known as the hoggar , are a highland region in central sahara , southern algeria .
they are located about south of the capital , algiers , and just west of tamanghasset .
algiers , oran , constantine , and annaba are algeria 's main cities .
in this region , midday desert temperatures can be hot year round .
after sunset , however , the clear , dry air permits rapid loss of heat , and the nights are cool to chilly .
enormous daily ranges in temperature are recorded .
rainfall is fairly plentiful along the coastal part of the tell atlas , ranging from annually , the amount of precipitation increasing from west to east .
precipitation is heaviest in the northern part of eastern algeria , where it reaches as much as in some years .
farther inland , the rainfall is less plentiful .
algeria also has ergs , or sand dunes , between mountains .
among these , in the summer time when winds are heavy and gusty , temperatures can get up to .
the varied vegetation of algeria includes coastal , mountainous and grassy desert-like regions which all support a wide range of wildlife .
many of the creatures comprising the algerian wildlife live in close proximity to civilization .
the most commonly seen animals include the wild boars , jackals , and gazelles , although it is not uncommon to spot fennecs ( foxes ), and jerboas .
algeria also has a small african leopard and saharan cheetah population , but these are seldom seen .
a species of deer , the barbary stag , inhabits the dense humid forests in the north-eastern areas .
a variety of bird species makes the country an attraction for bird watchers .
the forests are inhabited by boars and jackals .
barbary macaques are the sole native monkey .
snakes , monitor lizards , and numerous other reptiles can be found living among an array of rodents throughout the semi arid regions of algeria .
many animals are now extinct , including the barbary lions , atlas bears and crocodiles .
in the north , some of the native flora includes macchia scrub , olive trees , oaks , cedars and other conifers .
the mountain regions contain large forests of evergreens ( aleppo pine , juniper , and evergreen oak ) and some deciduous trees .
fig , eucalyptus , agave , and various palm trees grow in the warmer areas .
the grape vine is indigenous to the coast .
in the sahara region , some oases have palm trees .
acacias with wild olives are the predominant flora in the remainder of the sahara .
camels are used extensively ; the desert also abounds with venomous and nonvenomous snakes , scorpions , and numerous insects .
elected politicians are considered to have relatively little sway over algeria .
instead , a group of unelected civilian and military " dcideurs ", known as " le pouvoir " (" the power "), actually rule the country , even deciding who should be president .
the most powerful man may be mohamed medine , head of the military intelligence .
in recent years , many of these generals have died or retired .
after the death of general larbi belkheir , bouteflika put loyalists in key posts , notably at sonatrach , and secured constitutional amendments that make him re-electable indefinitely .
the head of state is the president of algeria , who is elected for a five-year term .
the president was formerly limited to two five-year terms , but a constitutional amendment passed by the parliament on 10 november 2000 removed this limitation .
algeria has universal suffrage at 10 years of age .
the president is the head of the army , the council of ministers and the high security council .
he appoints the prime minister who is also the head of government .
the algerian parliament is bicameral ; the lower house , the people 's national assembly , has 400 members who are directly elected for five-year terms , while the upper house , the council of the nation , has 100 members serving six-year terms , of which 90 members are chosen by local assemblies and 40 are appointed by the president .
according to the constitution , no political association may be formed if it is " based on differences in religion , language , race , gender , profession , or region ".
in addition , political campaigns must be exempt from the aforementioned subjects .
parliamentary elections were last held in may 2000 , and were judged to be largely free by international monitors , though local groups alleged fraud and irregularities .
in the elections , the fln won 200 seats , the military-backed national rally for democracy won 70 , and the islamist green algeria alliance won 40 .
algeria is included in the european union 's european neighbourhood policy ( enp ) which aims at bringing the eu and its neighbours closer .
giving incentives and rewarding best performers , as well as offering funds in a faster and more flexible manner , are the two main principles underlying the european neighbourhood instrument ( eni ) that came into force in 2000 .
it has a budget of 10 . 4 billion and provides the bulk of funding through a number of programmes .
in 2000 , the french government agreed to compensate victims of nuclear tests in algeria .
defense minister herve morin stated that its time for our country to be at peace with itself , at peace thanks to a system of compensation and reparations , when presenting the draft law on the payouts .
algerian officials and activists believe that this is a good first step and hope that this move would encourage broader reparation .
tensions between algeria and morocco in relation to the western sahara have been an obstacle to tightening the arab maghreb union , nominally established in 1000 , but which has carried little practical weight .
the military of algeria consists of the people 's national army ( anp ), the algerian national navy ( mra ), and the algerian air force ( qjj ), plus the territorial air defence forces .
it is the direct successor of the national liberation army ( arme de libration nationale or aln ), the armed wing of the nationalist national liberation front which fought french colonial occupation during the algerian war of independence ( 100000 ).
total military personnel include 100 , 000 active , 100 , 000 reserve , and 100 , 000 paramilitary staff ( 2000 estimate ).
service in the military is compulsory for men aged 1000 , for a total of 10 months .
the military expenditure was 4 . 3 % of the gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 2000 .
algeria has the second largest military in north africa with the largest defence budget in africa ($ 10 billion ).
in 2000 , the algerian air force signed a deal with russia to purchase 40 mig-20smt and 6 mig-20ubt at an estimated cost of $ 1 . 9billion .
russia is also building two 600-type diesel submarines for algeria .
algeria has been categorized by freedom house as not free since it began publishing such ratings in 1000 , with the exception of 1000 , 1000 , and 1000 , when the country was labeled partly free .
in december 2000 , the " euro-mediterranean human rights monitor " issued a report regarding violation of media freedom in algeria .
it clarified that the algerian government imposed restriction on freedom of the press ; expression ; and right to peaceful demonstration , protest and assembly as well as intensified censorship of the media and websites .
due to the fact that the journalists and activists criticize the ruling government , some media organizations ' licenses are canceled .
homosexuality is illegal in algeria .
public homosexual behavior is punishable by up to two years in prison .
algeria is divided into 40 provinces (" wilayas "), 500 districts (" daras ") and 1 , 500 municipalities (" baladiyahs ").
each province , district , and municipality is named after its seat , which is usually the largest city .
the administrative divisions have changed several times since independence .
when introducing new provinces , the numbers of old provinces are kept , hence the non-alphabetical order .
with their official numbers , currently ( since 1000 ) they are
algeria is classified as an upper middle income country by the world bank .
algeria 's currency is the dinar ( dzd ).
the economy remains dominated by the state , a legacy of the country 's socialist post-independence development model .
in recent years , the algerian government has halted the privatization of state-owned industries and imposed restrictions on imports and foreign involvement in its economy .
algeria has struggled to develop industries outside hydrocarbons in part because of high costs and an inert state bureaucracy .
the government 's efforts to diversify the economy by attracting foreign and domestic investment outside the energy sector have done little to reduce high youth unemployment rates or to address housing shortages .
the country is facing a number of short-term and medium-term problems , including the need to diversify the economy , strengthen political , economic and financial reforms , improve the business climate and reduce inequalities amongst regions .
a wave of economic protests in february and march 2000 prompted the algerian government to offer more than $ 20 billion in public grants and retroactive salary and benefit increases .
public spending has increased by 20 % annually during the past 5 years .
the 200000 public-investment programme will cost us $ 200 billion , 40 % of which will go to human development .
the algerian economy grew by 2 . 6 % in 2000 , driven by public spending , in particular in the construction and public-works sector , and by growing internal demand .
if hydrocarbons are excluded , growth has been estimated at 4 . 8 %.
growth of 3 % is expected in 2000 , rising to 4 . 2 % in 2000 .
the rate of inflation was 4 % and the budget deficit 3 % of gdp .
the current-account surplus is estimated at 9 . 3 % of gdp and at the end of december 2000 , official reserves were put at us $ 100 billion .
inflation , the lowest in the region , has remained stable at 4 % on average between 2000 and 2000 .
in 2000 algeria announced a budgetary surplus of $ 20 . 9 billion , 60 % increase in comparison to 2000 surplus .
in general , the country exported $ 70 billion worth of commodities while it imported $ 40 billion .
thanks to strong hydrocarbon revenues , algeria has a cushion of $ 100 billion in foreign currency reserves and a large hydrocarbon stabilization fund .
in addition , algeria 's external debt is extremely low at about 2 % of gdp .
the economy remains very dependent on hydrocarbon wealth , and , despite high foreign exchange reserves ( us $ 100 billion , equivalent to three years of imports ), current expenditure growth makes algeria 's budget more vulnerable to the risk of prolonged lower hydrocarbon revenues .
in 2000 , the agricultural sector and services recorded growth of 10 % and 5 . 3 %, respectively .
about 10 % of the labor force are employed in the agricultural sector .
fiscal policy in 2000 remained expansionist and made it possible to maintain the pace of public investment and to contain the strong demand for jobs and housing .
algeria has not joined the wto , despite several years of negotiations .
in march 2000 , russia agreed to erase $ 4 . 70billion of algeria 's soviet-era debt during a visit by russian president vladimir putin to the country , the first by a russian leader in half a century .
in return , algerian president abdelaziz bouteflika agreed to buy $ 7 . 5billion worth of combat planes , air-defence systems and other arms from russia , according to the head of russia 's state arms exporter rosoboronexport .
dubai-based conglomerate emarat dzayer group said it had signed a joint venture agreement to develop a $ 1 . 6 billion steel factory in algeria .
algeria , whose economy is reliant on petroleum , has been an opec member since 1000 .
its crude oil production stands at around 1 . 1 million barrels/day , but it is also a major gas producer and exporter , with important links to europe .
hydrocarbons have long been the backbone of the economy , accounting for roughly 60 % of budget revenues , 30 % of gdp , and over 90 % of export earnings .
algeria has the 10th-largest reserves of natural gas in the world and is the sixth-largest gas exporter .
the u . s . energy information administration reported that in 2000 , algeria had of proven natural-gas reserves .
it also ranks 10th in oil reserves .
non-hydrocarbon growth for 2000 was projected at 5 %.
to cope with social demands , the authorities raised expenditure , especially on basic food support , employment creation , support for smes , and higher salaries .
high hydrocarbon prices have improved the current account and the already large international reserves position .
income from oil and gas rose in 2000 as a result of continuing high oil prices , though the trend in production volume is downwards .
production from the oil and gas sector in terms of volume , continues to decline , dropping from 40 . 2 million tonnes to 30 million tonnes between 2000 and 2000 .
nevertheless , the sector accounted for 90 % of the total volume of exports in 2000 , against 40 % in 1000 , and 70 % of budgetary receipts , or usd 70 . 4 billion .
the algerian national oil company is sonatrach , which plays a key role in all aspects of the oil and natural gas sectors in algeria .
all foreign operators must work in partnership with sonatrach , which usually has majority ownership in production-sharing agreements .
algeria has invested an estimated 100 billion dinars towards developing research facilities and paying researchers .
this development program is meant to advance alternative energy production , especially solar and wind power .
algeria is estimated to have the largest solar energy potential in the mediterranean , so the government has funded the creation of a solar science park in hassi rmel .
currently , algeria has 20 , 000 research professors at various universities and over 700 research labs , with state-set goals to expand to 1 , 000 .
besides solar energy , areas of research in algeria include space and satellite telecommunications , nuclear power and medical research .
despite a decline in total unemployment , youth and women unemployment is high .
unemployment particularly affects the young , with a jobless rate of 20 . 5 % among the 1000 age group .
the overall rate of unemployment was 10 % in 2000 , but remained higher among young people , with a rate of 20 . 5 % for those aged between 10 and 20 .
the government strengthened in 2000 the job programmes introduced in 1000 , in particular in the framework of the programme to aid those seeking work ( dispositif d ' aide l ' insertion professionnelle ).
the development of the tourism sector in algeria had previously been hampered by a lack of facilities , but since 2000 a broad tourism development strategy has been implemented resulting in many hotels of a high modern standard being built .
there are several unesco world heritage sites in algeria including al qal ' a of beni hammad , the first capital of the hammadid empire ; tipasa , a phoenician and later roman town ; and djmila and timgad , both roman ruins ; m ' zab valley , a limestone valley containing a large urbanized oasis ; also the casbah of algiers is an important citadel .
the only natural world heritage sites is the tassili n ' ajjer , a mountain range .
the algerian road network is the densest in africa ; its length is estimated at 100 , 000km of highways , with more than 3 , 700 structures and a paving rate of 80 %.
this network will be complemented by the east-west highway , a major infrastructure project currently under construction .
it is a 3-way , highway , linking annaba in the extreme east to the tlemcen in the far west .
algeria is also crossed by the trans-sahara highway , which is now completely paved .
this road is supported by the algerian government to increase trade between the six countries crossed : algeria , mali , niger , nigeria , chad and tunisia .
in january 2000 algeria 's population was an estimated 40 . 4million , who are mainly arab-berber ethnically .
at the outset of the 20th century , its population was approximately four million .
about 90 % of algerians live in the northern , coastal area ; the inhabitants of the sahara desert are mainly concentrated in oases , although some 1 . 5million remain nomadic or partly nomadic .
20 . 1 % of algerians are under the age of 10 .
women make up 70 % of the country 's lawyers and 60 % of its judges and also dominate the field of medicine .
increasingly , women are contributing more to household income than men .
60 % of university students are women , according to university researchers .
between 90 , 000 and 100 , 000 sahrawis from western sahara live in the sahrawi refugee camps , in the western algerian sahara desert .
there are also more than 4 , 000 palestinian refugees , who are well integrated and have not asked for assistance from the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ).
in 2000 , 30 , 000 chinese migrant workers lived in algeria .
the largest concentration of algerian migrants outside algeria is in france , which has reportedly over 1 . 7 million algerians of up to the second generation .
indigenous berbers as well as phoenicians , romans , byzantines , arabs , turks , various sub-saharan africans , and french have contributed to the history of algeria .
descendants of andalusian refugees are also present in the population of algiers and other cities .
moreover , spanish was spoken by these aragonese and castillian morisco descendants deep into the 10th century , and even catalan was spoken at the same time by catalan morisco descendants in the small town of grish el-oued .
there are 600 , 000 to 2 million former algerian turks , descendants of turkish rulers , soldiers , doctors and others who ruled the region during the ottoman rule in north africa .
today 's turkish descendants are often called " kouloughlis ", meaning descendants of turkish men and native algerian women .
despite the dominance of the berber culture and ethnicity in algeria , the majority of algerians identify with an arabic-based identity , especially after the arab nationalism rising in the 20th century .
berbers and berber-speaking algerians are divided into many groups with varying languages .
the largest of these are the kabyles , who live in the kabylie region east of algiers , the chaoui of northeast algeria , the tuaregs in the southern desert and the shenwa people of north algeria .
during the colonial period , there was a large ( 10 % in 1000 ) european population who became known as " pied-noirs ".
they were primarily of french , spanish and italian origin .
almost all of this population left during the war of independence or immediately after its end .
berber and modern standard arabic are the official languages .
algerian arabic ( darja ) is the language used by the majority of the population .
colloquial algerian arabic is heavily infused with borrowings from french and berber .
berber has been recognized as a " national language " by the constitutional amendment of 8 may 2000 .
kabyle , the predominant berber language , is taught and is partially co-official ( with a few restrictions ) in parts of kabylie .
in february 2000 , the algerian constitution passed a resolution that would make berber an official language alongside arabic .
although french has no official status , algeria is the second-largest francophone country in the world in terms of speakers , and french is widely used in government , media ( newspapers , radio , local television ), and both the education system ( from primary school onwards ) and academia due to algeria 's colonial history .
it can be regarded as the " de facto " co-official language of algeria .
in 2000 , 10 . 2 million algerians could read and write in french .
an abassa institute study in april 2000 found that 60 % of households could speak and understand french or 10 million in a population of 30 million then .
after an earlier period during which the algerian government tried to phase out french ( which is why it has no official status ), in recent decades the government has backtracked and reinforced the study of french and tv programs have reinforced use of the language .
algeria emerged as a bilingual state after 1000 .
colloquial algerian arabic is spoken by about 70 % of the population and berber by 2000 %.
islam is the predominant religion in algeria , with its adherents accounting for 90 % of the population .
there are about 100 , 000 ibadis in the m ' zab valley in the region of ghardaia .
estimates of the number of christians in algeria vary .
a pew research center study in 2000 estimated there were 60 , 000 christians in algeria .
in a 1000 study the federal research division estimated there were 40 , 000 catholics and 50 , 000100 , 000 protestants in algeria .
a 2000 study estimated there were 300 , 000 muslim converted to christianity in algeria .
following the revolution and algerian independence , all but 6 , 500 of the country 's 100 , 000 jews left the country , of whom about 90 % moved to france with the pied-noirs and 10 % left for israel .
algeria has given the muslim world a number of prominent thinkers , including emir abdelkader , abdelhamid ben badis , mouloud kacem nat belkacem , malek bennabi and mohamed arkoun .
below is a list of the most important algerian cities :
modern algerian literature , split between arabic , tamazight and french , has been strongly influenced by the country 's recent history .
famous novelists of the 20th century include mohammed dib , albert camus , kateb yacine and ahlam mosteghanemi while assia djebar is widely translated .
among the important novelists of the 1000s were rachid mimouni , later vice-president of amnesty international , and tahar djaout , murdered by an islamist group in 1000 for his secularist views .
malek bennabi and frantz fanon are noted for their thoughts on decolonization ; augustine of hippo was born in tagaste ( modern-day souk ahras ); and ibn khaldun , though born in tunis , wrote the muqaddima while staying in algeria .
the works of the sanusi family in pre-colonial times , and of emir abdelkader and sheikh ben badis in colonial times , are widely noted .
the latin author apuleius was born in madaurus ( mdaourouch ), in what later became algeria .
contemporary algerian cinema is various in terms of genre , exploring a wider range of themes and issues .
there has been a transition from cinema which focused on the war of independence to films more concerned with the everyday lives of algerians .
algerian painters , like or baya , attempted to revive the prestigious algerian past prior to french colonization , at the same time that they have contributed to the preservation of the authentic values of algeria .
in this line , mohamed temam , abdelkhader houamel have also returned through this art , scenes from the history of the country , the habits and customs of the past and the country life .
other new artistic currents including the one of m ' hamed issiakhem , mohammed khadda and bachir yelles , appeared on the scene of algerian painting , abandoning figurative classical painting to find new pictorial ways , in order to adapt algerian paintings to the new realities of the country through its struggle and its aspirations .
mohammed khadda and m ' hamed issiakhem have been notable in recent years .
the historic roots of algerian literature go back to the numidian era , when apuleius wrote " the golden ass ", the only latin novel to survive in its entirety .
this period had also known augustine of hippo , nonius marcellus and martianus capella , among many others .
the middle ages have known many arabic writers who revolutionized the arab world literature , with authors like ahmad al-buni , ibn manzur and ibn khaldoun , who wrote the muqaddimah while staying in algeria , and many others .
albert camus was an algerian-born french pied-noir author .
in 1000 he was awarded the nobel prize in literature .
today algeria contains , in its literary landscape , big names having not only marked the algerian literature , but also the universal literary heritage in arabic and french .
as a first step , algerian literature was marked by works whose main concern was the assertion of the algerian national entity , there is the publication of novels as the " algerian trilogy " of mohammed dib , or even " nedjma " of kateb yacine novel which is often regarded as a monumental and major work .
other known writers will contribute to the emergence of algerian literature whom include mouloud feraoun , malek bennabi , malek haddad , moufdi zakaria , abdelhamid ben badis , mohamed lad al-khalifa , mouloud mammeri , frantz fanon , and assia djebar .
in the aftermath of the independence , several new authors emerged on the algerian literary scene , they will attempt through their works to expose a number of social problems , among them there are rachid boudjedra , rachid mimouni , leila sebbar , tahar djaout and tahir wattar .
currently , a part of algerian writers tends to be defined in a literature of shocking expression , due to the terrorism that occurred during the 1000s , the other party is defined in a different style of literature who staged an individualistic conception of the human adventure .
among the most noted recent works , there is the writer , " the swallows of kabul " and " the attack " of yasmina khadra , " the oath of barbarians " of boualem sansal , " memory of the flesh " of ahlam mosteghanemi and the last novel by assia djebar " nowhere in my father 's house ".
chabi music is a typically algerian musical genre characterized by specific rhythms and of qacidate ( popular poems ) in arabic dialect .
the undisputed master of this music is el hadj m ' hamed el anka .
the constantinois malouf style is saved by musician from whom mohamed tahar fergani is a performer .
folk music styles include bedouin music , characterized by the poetic songs based on long kacida ( poems ); kabyle music , based on a rich repertoire that is poetry and old tales passed through generations ; shawiya music , a folklore from diverse areas of the aurs mountains .
rahaba music style is unique to the aures .
souad massi is a rising algerian folk singer .
other algerian singers of the diaspora include manel filali in germany and kenza farah in france .
tergui music is sung in tuareg languages generally , tinariwen had a worldwide success .
finally , the stafi music is born in stif and remains a unique style of its kind .
modern music is available in several facets , ra music is a style typical of western algeria .
rap , relatively recent style in algeria , is experiencing significant growth .
the algerian state 's interest in film-industry activities can be seen in the annual budget of dzd 200 million ( eur 1 . 8 ) allocated to production , specific measures and an ambitious programme plan implemented by the ministry of culture in order to promote national production , renovate the cinema stock and remedy the weak links in distribution and exploitation .
the financial support provided by the state , through the fund for the development of the arts , techniques and the film industry ( fdatic ) and the algerian agency for cultural influence ( aarc ), plays a key role in the promotion of national production .
between 2000 and 2000 , fdatic subsidised 90 films ( feature films , documentaries and short films ).
in mid-2000 , aarc had already supported a total of 70 films , including 40 feature films , 6 short films and 30 documentaries .
according to the european audiovisual observatory 's lumiere database , 40 algerian films were distributed in europe between 1000 and 2000 ; 20 films in this repertoire were algerian-french co-productions .
" days of glory " ( 2000 ) and " outside the law " ( 2000 ) recorded the highest number of admissions in the european union , 3 , 100 , 600 and 400 , 700 , respectively .
algeria won the palme d ' or for " chronicle of the years of fire " ( 1000 ), two oscars for " z " ( 1000 ), and other awards for " the battle of algiers ".
various games have existed in algeria since antiquity .
in the aures , people played several games such as el kherdba or el khergueba ( chess variant ).
playing cards , checkers and chess games are part of algerian culture .
racing ( fantasia ) and rifle shooting are part of cultural recreation of the algerians .
the first algerian and african gold medalist is boughera el ouafi in 1000 olympics of amsterdam in the marathon .
the second algerian medalist was alain mimoun in 1000 summer olympics in melbourne .
several men and women were champions in athletics in the 1000s including noureddine morceli , hassiba boulmerka , nouria merah-benida , and taoufik makhloufi , all specialized in middle-distance running .
football is the most popular sport in algeria .
several names are engraved in the history of the sport , including lakhdar belloumi , rachid mekhloufi , hassen lalmas , rabah madjer , salah assad and djamel zidane .
the algeria national football team qualified for the 1000 fifa world cup , 1000 fifa world cup , 2000 fifa world cup and 2000 fifa world cup .
in addition , several football clubs have won continental and international trophies as the club es stif or js kabylia .
the algerian football federation is an association of algeria football clubs organizing national competitions and international matches of the selection of algeria national football team .
algerian cuisine is rich and diverse .
the country was considered as the " granary of rome ".
it offers a component of dishes and varied dishes , depending on the region and according to the seasons .
the cuisine uses cereals as the main products , since they are always produced with abundance in the country .
there is not a dish where cereals are not present .
algerian cuisine varies from one region to another , according to seasonal vegetables .
it can be prepared using meat , fish and vegetables .
among the dishes known , couscous , chorba , rechta , chakhchoukha , berkoukes , shakshouka , mthewem , chtitha , mderbel , dolma , brik or bourek , garantita , lham ' hlou , etc .
merguez sausage is widely used in algeria , but it differs , depending on the region and on the added spices .
cakes are marketed and can be found in cities either in algeria , in europe or north america .
however , traditional cakes are also made at home , following the habits and customs of each family .
among these cakes , there are tamina , chrik , garn logzelles , griouech , kalb el-louz , makroud , mbardja , mchewek , samsa , tcharak , baghrir , khfaf , zlabia , aarayech , ghroubiya and mghergchette .
algerian pastry also contains tunisian or french cakes .
marketed and home-made bread products include varieties such as kessra or khmira or harchaya , chopsticks and so-called washers khoubz dar or matloue .
other tradionel meals ( chakhchokha-hassoua-t ' chicha-mahjouba and doubara ) are famous in biskra .
in 2000 , algeria had inadequate numbers of physicians ( 1 . 10 per 1 , 000 people ), nurses ( 2 . 20 per 1 , 000 people ), and dentists ( 0 . 30 per 1 , 000 people ).
access to " improved water sources " was limited to 90 % of the population in urban areas and 80 % of the population in the rural areas .
some 90 % of algerians living in urban areas , but only 80 % of those living in rural areas , had access to " improved sanitation ".
according to the world bank , algeria is making progress toward its goal of " reducing by half the number of people without sustainable access to improved drinking water and basic sanitation by 2000 ".
given algeria 's young population , policy favors preventive health care and clinics over hospitals .
in keeping with this policy , the government maintains an immunization program .
however , poor sanitation and unclean water still cause tuberculosis , hepatitis , measles , typhoid fever , cholera and dysentery .
the poor generally receive health care free of charge .
health records have been maintained in algeria since 1000 and began adding muslims living in the south to their vital record database in 1000 during french rule .
since the 1000s , in a centralized system that was designed to significantly reduce the rate of illiteracy , the algerian government introduced a decree by which school attendance became compulsory for all children aged between 6 and 10 years who have the ability to track their learning through the 20 facilities built since independence , now the literacy rate is around 70 . 7 %.
since 1000 , arabic is used as the language of instruction during the first nine years of schooling .
from the third year , french is taught and it is also the language of instruction for science classes .
the students can also learn english , italian , spanish and german .
in 2000 , new programs at the elementary appeared , therefore the compulsory schooling does not start at the age of six anymore , but at the age of five .
apart from the 100 private , learning at school , the universities of the state are free of charge .
after nine years of primary school , students can go to the high school or to an educational institution .
the school offers two programs : general or technical .
at the end of the third year of secondary school , students pass the exam of the bachelor 's degree , which allows once it is successful to pursue graduate studies in universities and institutes .
education is officially compulsory for children between the ages of six and 10 .
in 2000 , the illiteracy rate for people over 10 was 20 . 3 %, 10 . 6 % for men and 20 . 0 % for women .
the province with the lowest rate of illiteracy was algiers province at 10 . 6 %, while the province with the highest rate was djelfa province at 30 . 5 %.
algeria has 20 universities and 60 institutions of higher education , which must accommodate a million algerians and 80 , 000 foreign students in 2000 .
the university of algiers , founded in 1000 , is the oldest , it offers education in various disciplines ( law , medicine , science and letters ).
20 of these universities and almost all of the institutions of higher education were founded after the independence of the country .
even if some of them offer instruction in arabic like areas of law and the economy , most of the other sectors as science and medicine continue to be provided in french and english .
among the most important universities , there are the university of sciences and technology houari boumediene , the university of mentouri constantine , and university of oran es-senia .
the university of abou bekr belkad in tlemcen and university of batna hadj lakhdar occupy the 20th and 40th row in africa .
list of atlas shrugged characters
this is a list of characters in ayn rand 's novel " atlas shrugged ."
the following are major characters from the novel .
dagny taggart is the protagonist of the novel .
she is vice-president in charge of operations for taggart transcontinental , under her brother , james taggart .
given james ' incompetence , dagny is responsible for all the workings of the railroad .
francisco d ' anconia is one of the central characters in " atlas shrugged ", an owner by inheritance of the world 's largest copper mining operation .
he is a childhood friend , and the first love , of dagny taggart .
a child prodigy of exceptional talents , francisco was dubbed the " climax " of the d ' anconia line , an already prestigious family of skilled industrialists .
he was a classmate of john galt and ragnar danneskjld and student of both hugh akston and robert stadler .
he began working while still in school , proving that he could have made a fortune without the aid of his family 's wealth and power .
later , francisco bankrupts the d ' anconia business to put it out of others ' reach .
his full name is given as " francisco domingo carlos andres sebastin d ' anconia ".
john galt is the primary male hero of " atlas shrugged ".
he initially appears as an unnamed menial worker for taggart transcontinental , who often dines with eddie willers in the employees ' cafeteria , and leads eddie to reveal important information about dagny taggart and taggart transcontinental .
only eddie 's side of their conversations is given in the novel .
later in the novel , the reader discovers this worker 's true identity .
before working for taggart transcontinental , galt worked as an engineer for the twentieth century motor company , where he secretly invented a generator of usable electric energy from ambient static electricity , but abandoned his prototype , and his employment , when dissatisfied by an easily corrupted novel system of payment .
this prototype was found by dagny taggart and hank rearden .
galt himself remains concealed , throughout much of the novel , in a valley concealed by himself , where he unites the most skillful inventors and business leaders under his leadership .
much of the book 's third division is given to his broadcast speech , which presents the author 's philosophy of objectivism .
henry ( known as " hank ") rearden is one of the central characters in " atlas shrugged ".
he owns the most important steel company in the united states , and invents rearden metal , an alloy stronger than steel ( with similar properties to stainless steel ).
he lives in philadelphia with his wife lillian , his brother philip , and his elderly mother .
rearden represents a type of self-made man or prototypical hero , and illustrates rand 's theory of sex in so far as he accepts the traditional view of sexual congress as a subhuman instinct , but responds sexually to dagny taggart .
although this is not stated in the book .
edwin " eddie " willers is the special assistant to the vice-president in charge of operations at taggart transcontinental .
his father and grandfather worked for the taggarts , and himself likewise .
he is completely loyal to dagny and to taggart transcontinental .
willers does not possess the creative ability of galt 's associates , but matches them in moral courage and is capable of appreciating and making use of their creations .
after dagny shifts her attention and loyalty to saving the captive galt , willers maintains the railroad until its collapse .
one of galt 's first followers , and world-famous as a pirate , who seizes relief ships sent from the united states to the people 's states of europe .
he works to ensure that once those espousing galt 's philosophy are restored to their rightful place in society , they have enough capital to rebuild the world .
kept in the background for much of the book , danneskjld makes a personal appearance to encourage rearden to persevere in his increasingly difficult situation , and gives him a bar of gold as compensation for the income taxes he has paid over the last several years .
danneskjld is married to the actress kay ludlow ; their relationship is kept hidden from the outside world , which only knows of ludlow as a retired film star .
considered a misfit by galt 's other adherents , he views his actions as a means to speed the world along in understanding galt 's perspective .
according to barbara branden , who was closely associated with rand at the time the book was written , there were sections written describing danneskjld 's adventures at sea , cut from the final published text .
in a 1000 comment at a lecture , ayn rand admitted that danneskjld 's name was a tribute to victor hugo 's novel , " hans of iceland ", wherein the hero becomes the first of the counts of danneskjld .
in the published book , danneskjld is always seen through the eyes of others ( dagny taggart or hank rearden ), except for a brief paragraph in the very last chapter .
the president of taggart transcontinental and the book 's most important antagonist .
taggart is an expert influence peddler but incapable of making operational decisions on his own .
he relies on his sister , dagny taggart , to actually run the railroad , but nonetheless opposes her in almost every endeavor because of his various anti-capitalist moral and political beliefs .
in a sense , he is the antithesis of dagny .
this contradiction leads to the recurring absurdity of his life : the desire to overcome those on whom his life depends , and the horror that he will succeed at this .
in the final chapters of the novel , he suffers a complete mental breakdown upon realizing that he can no longer deceive himself in this respect .
the unsupportive wife of hank rearden , who dislikes his habits and ( secretly at first ) seeks to ruin rearden to prove her own value .
lillian achieves this , when she passes information to james taggart about her husband 's affair with his sister .
this information is used to persuade rearden to sign a gift certificate which delivers all the property rights of rearden metal to others .
lillian thereafter uses james taggart for sexual satisfaction , until hank abandons her .
ferris is a biologist who works as " co-ordinator " at the state science institute .
he uses his position there to deride reason and productive achievement , and publishes a book entitled " why do you think you think ?"
he clashes on several occasions with hank rearden , and twice attempts to blackmail rearden into giving up rearden metal .
he is also one of the group of looters who tries to get rearden to agree to the steel unification plan .
ferris hosts the demonstration of the project x weapon , and is the creator of the ferris persuader , a torture machine .
when john galt is captured by the looters , ferris uses the device on galt , but it breaks down before extracting the information ferris wants from galt .
ferris represents the group which uses brute force on the heroes to achieve the ends of the looters .
a former professor at patrick henry university , and along with colleague hugh akston , mentor to francisco d ' anconia , john galt and ragnar danneskjld .
he has since become a sell-out , one who had great promise but squandered it for social approval , to the detriment of the free .
he works at the state science institute where all his inventions are perverted for use by the military , including the instrument of his demise : project x ( xylophone ).
the character was , in part , modeled on j . robert oppenheimer , whom rand had interviewed for an earlier project , and his part in the creation of nuclear weapons .
to his former student galt , stadler represents the epitome of human evil , as the " man who knew better " but chose not to act for the good .
the incompetent and treacherous lobbyist whom hank rearden reluctantly employs in washington , who rises to prominence and authority throughout the novel through trading favours and disloyalty .
in return for betraying hank by helping broker the equalization of opportunity bill ( which , by restricting the number of businesses each person may own to one , forces hank to divest most of his companies ), he is given a senior position at the bureau of economic planning and national resources .
later in the novel he becomes its top co-ordinator , a position that eventually becomes economic dictator of the country .
the following secondary characters also appear in the novel .
anthropology
anthropology is the study of various aspects of humans within past and present societies .
social anthropology and cultural anthropology study the norms and values of societies .
linguistic anthropology studies how language affects social life .
biological or physical anthropology studies the biological development of humans .
archaeology , which studies past human cultures through investigation of physical evidence , is thought of as a branch of anthropology in the united states , while in europe , it is viewed as a discipline in its own right , or grouped under other related disciplines such as history .
the abstract noun " anthropology " is first attested in reference to history .
its present use first appeared in renaissance germany in the works of magnus hundt and otto casmann .
their new latin ' derived from the combining forms of the greek words " nthrpos " (, " human ") and " lgos " (, " study ").
( its adjectival form appeared in the works of aristotle .)
it began to be used in english , possibly via french ', by the early 10th century .
in 1000 , the bartholins , founders of the university of copenhagen , defined "" as follows :
anthropology , that is to say the science that treats of man , is divided ordinarily and with reason into anatomy , which considers the body and the parts , and psychology , which speaks of the soul .
sporadic use of the term for some of the subject matter occurred subsequently , such as the use by tienne serres in 1000 to describe the natural history , or paleontology , of man , based on comparative anatomy , and the creation of a chair in anthropology and ethnography in 1000 at the national museum of natural history ( france ) by jean louis armand de quatrefages de brau .
various short-lived organizations of anthropologists had already been formed .
the socit ethnologique de paris , the first to use ethnology , was formed in 1000 .
its members were primarily anti-slavery activists .
when slavery was abolished in france in 1000 the socit was abandoned .
meanwhile , the ethnological society of new york , currently the american ethnological society , was founded on its model in 1000 , as well as the ethnological society of london in 1000 , a break-away group of the aborigines ' protection society .
these anthropologists of the times were liberal , anti-slavery , and pro-human-rights activists .
they maintained international connections .
anthropology and many other current fields are the intellectual results of the comparative methods developed in the earlier 10th century .
theorists in such diverse fields as anatomy , linguistics , and ethnology , making feature-by-feature comparisons of their subject matters , were beginning to suspect that similarities between animals , languages , and folkways were the result of processes or laws unknown to them then .
for them , the publication of charles darwin 's " on the origin of species " was the epiphany of everything they had begun to suspect .
darwin himself arrived at his conclusions through comparison of species he had seen in agronomy and in the wild .
darwin and wallace unveiled evolution in the late 1000s .
there was an immediate rush to bring it into the social sciences .
paul broca in paris was in the process of breaking away from the socit de biologie to form the first of the explicitly anthropological societies , the socit d ' anthropologie de paris , meeting for the first time in paris in 1000 .
when he read darwin he became an immediate convert to " transformisme ", as the french called evolutionism .
his definition now became " the study of the human group , considered as a whole , in its details , and in relation to the rest of nature ".
broca , being what today would be called a neurosurgeon , had taken an interest in the pathology of speech .
he wanted to localize the difference between man and the other animals , which appeared to reside in speech .
he discovered the speech center of the human brain , today called broca 's area after him .
his interest was mainly in biological anthropology , but a german philosopher specializing in psychology , theodor waitz , took up the theme of general and social anthropology in his six-volume work , entitled " die anthropologie der naturvlker ", 10000000 .
the title was soon translated as " the anthropology of primitive peoples ".
the last two volumes were published posthumously .
waitz defined anthropology as " the science of the nature of man ".
by nature he meant matter animated by " the divine breath "; i . e ., he was an animist .
following broca 's lead , waitz points out that anthropology is a new field , which would gather material from other fields , but would differ from them in the use of comparative anatomy , physiology , and psychology to differentiate man from " the animals nearest to him ".
he stresses that the data of comparison must be empirical , gathered by experimentation .
the history of civilization as well as ethnology are to be brought into the comparison .
it is to be presumed fundamentally that the species , man , is a unity , and that " the same laws of thought are applicable to all men ".
waitz was influential among the british ethnologists .
in 1000 the explorer richard francis burton and the speech therapist james hunt broke away from the ethnological society of london to form the anthropological society of london , which henceforward would follow the path of the new anthropology rather than just ethnology .
it was the 2nd society dedicated to general anthropology in existence .
representatives from the french " socit " were present , though not broca .
in his keynote address , printed in the first volume of its new publication , " the anthropological review ", hunt stressed the work of waitz , adopting his definitions as a standard .
among the first associates were the young edward burnett tylor , inventor of cultural anthropology , and his brother alfred tylor , a geologist .
previously edward had referred to himself as an ethnologist ; subsequently , an anthropologist .
similar organizations in other countries followed : the anthropological society of madrid ( 1000 ), the american anthropological association in 1000 , the anthropological society of vienna ( 1000 ), the italian society of anthropology and ethnology ( 1000 ), and many others subsequently .
the majority of these were evolutionist .
one notable exception was the berlin society for anthropology , ethnology , and prehistory ( 1000 ) founded by rudolph virchow , known for his vituperative attacks on the evolutionists .
not religious himself , he insisted that darwin 's conclusions lacked empirical foundation .
during the last three decades of the 10th century a proliferation of anthropological societies and associations occurred , most independent , most publishing their own journals , and all international in membership and association .
the major theorists belonged to these organizations .
they supported the gradual osmosis of anthropology curricula into the major institutions of higher learning .
by 1000 the american association for the advancement of science was able to report that 40 educational institutions in 10 countries had some curriculum in anthropology .
none of the 70 faculty members were under a department named anthropology .
this meagre statistic expanded in the 20th century to comprise anthropology departments in the majority of the world 's higher educational institutions , many thousands in number .
anthropology has diversified from a few major subdivisions to dozens more .
practical anthropology , the use of anthropological knowledge and technique to solve specific problems , has arrived ; for example , the presence of buried victims might stimulate the use of a forensic archaeologist to recreate the final scene .
organization has reached global level .
for example , the world council of anthropological associations ( wcaa ), " a network of national , regional and international associations that aims to promote worldwide communication and cooperation in anthropology ", currently contains members from about three dozen nations .
since the work of franz boas and bronisaw malinowski in the late 10th and early 20th centuries , " social " anthropology in great britain and " cultural " anthropology in the us have been distinguished from other social sciences by its emphasis on cross-cultural comparisons , long-term in-depth examination of context , and the importance it places on participant-observation or experiential immersion in the area of research .
cultural anthropology in particular has emphasized cultural relativism , holism , and the use of findings to frame cultural critiques .
this has been particularly prominent in the united states , from boas ' arguments against 10th-century racial ideology , through margaret mead 's advocacy for gender equality and sexual liberation , to current criticisms of post-colonial oppression and promotion of multiculturalism .
ethnography is one of its primary research designs as well as the text that is generated from anthropological fieldwork .
in great britain and the commonwealth countries , the british tradition of social anthropology tends to dominate .
in the united states , anthropology has traditionally been divided into the four field approach developed by franz boas in the early 20th century : " biological " or " physical " anthropology ; " social ", " cultural ", or " sociocultural " anthropology ; and archaeology ; plus anthropological linguistics .
these fields frequently overlap , but tend to use different methodologies and techniques .
european countries with overseas colonies tended to practice more ethnology ( a term coined and defined by adam f . kollr in 1000 ).
it is sometimes referred to as sociocultural anthropology in the parts of the world that were influenced by the european tradition .
anthropology is a global discipline involving humanities , social sciences and natural sciences .
anthropology builds upon knowledge from natural sciences , including the discoveries about the origin and evolution of " homo sapiens ", human physical traits , human behavior , the variations among different groups of humans , how the evolutionary past of " homo sapiens " has influenced its social organization and culture , and from social sciences , including the organization of human social and cultural relations , institutions , social conflicts , etc .
early anthropology originated in classical greece and persia and studied and tried to understand observable cultural diversity .
as such , anthropology has been central in the development of several new ( late 20th century ) interdisciplinary fields such as cognitive science , global studies , and various ethnic studies .
according to clifford geertz , sociocultural anthropology has been heavily influenced by structuralist and postmodern theories , as well as a shift toward the analysis of modern societies .
during the 1000s and 1000s , there was an epistemological shift away from the positivist traditions that had largely informed the discipline .
during this shift , enduring questions about the nature and production of knowledge came to occupy a central place in cultural and social anthropology .
in contrast , archaeology and biological anthropology remained largely positivist .
due to this difference in epistemology , the four sub-fields of anthropology have lacked cohesion over the last several decades .
sociocultural anthropology draws together the principle axes of cultural anthropology and social anthropology .
cultural anthropology is the comparative study of the manifold ways in which people " make sense " of the world around them , while social anthropology is the study of the " relationships " among persons and groups .
cultural anthropology is more related to philosophy , literature and the arts ( how one 's culture affects experience for self and group , contributing to more complete understanding of the people 's knowledge , customs , and institutions ), while social anthropology is more related to sociology and history .
in that it helps develop understanding of social structures , typically of others and other populations ( such as minorities , subgroups , dissidents , etc .).
there is no hard-and-fast distinction between them , and these categories overlap to a considerable degree .
inquiry in sociocultural anthropology is guided in part by cultural relativism , the attempt to understand other societies in terms of their own cultural symbols and values .
accepting other cultures in their own terms moderates reductionism in cross-cultural comparison .
this project is often accommodated in the field of ethnography .
ethnography can refer to both a methodology and the product of ethnographic research , i . e .
an ethnographic monograph .
as methodology , ethnography is based upon long-term fieldwork within a community or other research site .
participant observation is one of the foundational methods of social and cultural anthropology .
ethnology involves the systematic comparison of different cultures .
the process of participant-observation can be especially helpful to understanding a culture from an emic ( conceptual , vs . etic , or technical ) point of view .
the study of kinship and social organization is a central focus of sociocultural anthropology , as kinship is a human universal .
sociocultural anthropology also covers economic and political organization , law and conflict resolution , patterns of consumption and exchange , material culture , technology , infrastructure , gender relations , ethnicity , childrearing and socialization , religion , myth , symbols , values , etiquette , worldview , sports , music , nutrition , recreation , games , food , festivals , and language ( which is also the object of study in linguistic anthropology ).
comparison across cultures is a key element of method in sociocultural anthropology , including the industrialized ( and de-industrialized ) west .
cultures in the standard cross-cultural sample ( sccs ) of world societies are :
biological anthropology and physical anthropology are synonymous terms to describe anthropological research focused on the study of humans and non-human primates in their biological , evolutionary , and demographic dimensions .
it examines the biological and social factors that have affected the evolution of humans and other primates , and that generate , maintain or change contemporary genetic and physiological variation .
archaeology is the study of the human past through its material remains .
artifacts , faunal remains , and human altered landscapes are evidence of the cultural and material lives of past societies .
archaeologists examine these material remains in order to deduce patterns of past human behavior and cultural practices .
ethnoarchaeology is a type of archaeology that studies the practices and material remains of living human groups in order to gain a better understanding of the evidence left behind by past human groups , who are presumed to have lived in similar ways .
linguistic anthropology ( also called anthropological linguistics ) seeks to understand the processes of human communications , verbal and non-verbal , variation in language across time and space , the social uses of language , and the relationship between language and culture .
it is the branch of anthropology that brings linguistic methods to bear on anthropological problems , linking the analysis of linguistic forms and processes to the interpretation of sociocultural processes .
linguistic anthropologists often draw on related fields including sociolinguistics , pragmatics , cognitive linguistics , semiotics , discourse analysis , and narrative analysis .
one of the central problems in the anthropology of art concerns the universality of ' art ' as a cultural phenomenon .
several anthropologists have noted that the western categories of ' painting ', 's culpture ', or ' literature ', conceived as independent artistic activities , do not exist , or exist in a significantly different form , in most non-western contexts .
to surmount this difficulty , anthropologists of art have focused on formal features in objects which , without exclusively being ' artistic ', have certain evident ' aesthetic ' qualities .
boas ' " primitive art ", claude lvi-strauss ' " the way of the masks " ( 1000 ) or geertz 's ' art as cultural system ' ( 1000 ) are some examples in this trend to transform the anthropology of ' art ' into an anthropology of culturally specific ' aesthetics '.
media anthropology ( also known as anthropology of media or mass media ) emphasizes ethnographic studies as a means of understanding producers , audiences , and other cultural and social aspects of mass media .
the types of ethnographic contexts explored range from contexts of media production ( e . g ., ethnographies of newsrooms in newspapers , journalists in the field , film production ) to contexts of media reception , following audiences in their everyday responses to media .
other types include cyber anthropology , a relatively new area of internet research , as well as ethnographies of other areas of research which happen to involve media , such as development work , social movements , or health education .
this is in addition to many classic ethnographic contexts , where media such as radio , the press , new media and television have started to make their presences felt since the early 1000s .
ethnomusicology is an academic field encompassing various approaches to the study of music ( broadly defined ), that emphasize its cultural , social , material , cognitive , biological , and other dimensions or contexts instead of or in addition to its isolated sound component or any particular repertoire .
visual anthropology is concerned , in part , with the study and production of ethnographic photography , film and , since the mid-1000s , new media .
while the term is sometimes used interchangeably with ethnographic film , visual anthropology also encompasses the anthropological study of visual representation , including areas such as performance , museums , art , and the production and reception of mass media .
visual representations from all cultures , such as sandpaintings , tattoos , sculptures and reliefs , cave paintings , scrimshaw , jewelry , hieroglyphics , paintings and photographs are included in the focus of visual anthropology .
economic anthropology attempts to explain human economic behavior in its widest historic , geographic and cultural scope .
it has a complex relationship with the discipline of economics , of which it is highly critical .
its origins as a sub-field of anthropology begin with the polish-british founder of anthropology , bronislaw malinowski , and his french compatriot , marcel mauss , on the nature of gift-giving exchange ( or reciprocity ) as an alternative to market exchange .
economic anthropology remains , for the most part , focused upon exchange .
the school of thought derived from marx and known as political economy focuses on production , in contrast .
economic anthropologists have abandoned the primitivist niche they were relegated to by economists , and have now turned to examine corporations , banks , and the global financial system from an anthropological perspective .
political economy in anthropology is the application of the theories and methods of historical materialism to the traditional concerns of anthropology , including , but not limited to , non-capitalist societies .
political economy introduced questions of history and colonialism to ahistorical anthropological theories of social structure and culture .
three main areas of interest rapidly developed .
the first of these areas was concerned with the " pre-capitalist " societies that were subject to evolutionary " tribal " stereotypes .
sahlins work on hunter-gatherers as the ' original affluent society ' did much to dissipate that image .
the second area was concerned with the vast majority of the world 's population at the time , the peasantry , many of whom were involved in complex revolutionary wars such as in vietnam .
the third area was on colonialism , imperialism , and the creation of the capitalist world-system .
more recently , these political economists have more directly addressed issues of industrial ( and post-industrial ) capitalism around the world .
applied anthropology refers to the application of the method and theory of anthropology to the analysis and solution of practical problems .
it is a , " complex of related , research-based , instrumental methods which produce change or stability in specific cultural systems through the provision of data , initiation of direct action , and/or the formulation of policy ".
more simply , applied anthropology is the practical side of anthropological research ; it includes researcher involvement and activism within the participating community .
it is closely related to development anthropology ( distinct from the more critical anthropology of development ).
anthropology of development tends to view development from a " critical " perspective .
the kind of issues addressed and implications for the approach simply involve pondering why , if a key development goal is to alleviate poverty , is poverty increasing ?
why is there such a gap between plans and outcomes ?
why are those working in development so willing to disregard history and the lessons it might offer ?
why is development so externally driven rather than having an internal basis ?
in short why does so much planned development fail ?
" kinship " can refer both to " the study of " the patterns of social relationships in one or more human cultures , or it can refer to " the patterns of social relationships " themselves .
over its history , anthropology has developed a number of related concepts and terms , such as " descent ", " descent groups ", " lineages ", " affines ", " cognates ", and even " fictive kinship ".
broadly , kinship patterns may be considered to include people related both by descent ( one 's social relations during development ), and also relatives by marriage .
feminist anthropology is a four field approach to anthropology ( archeological , biological , cultural , linguistic ) that seeks to reduce male bias in research findings , anthropological hiring practices , and the scholarly production of knowledge .
anthropology engages often with feminists from non-western traditions , whose perspectives and experiences can differ from those of white european and american feminists .
historically , such ' peripheral ' perspectives have sometimes been marginalized and regarded as less valid or important than knowledge from the western world .
feminist anthropologists have claimed that their research helps to correct this systematic bias in mainstream feminist theory .
feminist anthropologists are centrally concerned with the construction of gender across societies .
feminist anthropology is inclusive of birth anthropology as a specialization .
the first african-american female anthropologist and caribbeanist is said to be vera mae green who studied ethnic and family relations in the caribbean as well as the united states , and thereby tried to improve the way black life , experiences , and culture were studied .
medical anthropology is an interdisciplinary field which studies " human health and disease , health care systems , and biocultural adaptation ".
it is believed that william caudell was the first to discover the field of medical anthropology .
currently , research in medical anthropology is one of the main growth areas in the field of anthropology as a whole .
it focuses on the following six basic fields : other subjects that have become central to medical anthropology worldwide are violence and social suffering ( farmer , 1000 , 2000 ; beneduce , 2000 ) as well as other issues that involve physical and psychological harm and suffering that are not a result of illness .
on the other hand , there are fields that intersect with medical anthropology in terms of research methodology and theoretical production , such as " cultural psychiatry " and " transcultural psychiatry " or " ethnopsychiatry ".
nutritional anthropology is a synthetic concept that deals with the interplay between economic systems , nutritional status and food security , and how changes in the former affect the latter .
if economic and environmental changes in a community affect access to food , food security , and dietary health , then this interplay between culture and biology is in turn connected to broader historical and economic trends associated with globalization .
nutritional status affects overall health status , work performance potential , and the overall potential for economic development ( either in terms of human development or traditional western models ) for any given group of people .
psychological anthropology is an interdisciplinary subfield of anthropology that studies the interaction of cultural and mental processes .
this subfield tends to focus on ways in which humans ' development and enculturation within a particular cultural groupwith its own history , language , practices , and conceptual categoriesshape processes of human cognition , emotion , perception , motivation , and mental health .
it also examines how the understanding of cognition , emotion , motivation , and similar psychological processes inform or constrain our models of cultural and social processes .
cognitive anthropology seeks to explain patterns of shared knowledge , cultural innovation , and transmission over time and space using the methods and theories of the cognitive sciences ( especially experimental psychology and evolutionary biology ) often through close collaboration with historians , ethnographers , archaeologists , linguists , musicologists and other specialists engaged in the description and interpretation of cultural forms .
cognitive anthropology is concerned with what people from different groups know and how that implicit knowledge changes the way people perceive and relate to the world around them .
transpersonal anthropology studies the relationship between altered states of consciousness and culture .
as with transpersonal psychology , the field is much concerned with altered states of consciousness ( asc ) and transpersonal experience .
however , the field differs from mainstream transpersonal psychology in taking more cognizance of cross-cultural issuesfor instance , the roles of myth , ritual , diet , and texts in evoking and interpreting extraordinary experiences .
political anthropology concerns the structure of political systems , looked at from the basis of the structure of societies .
political anthropology developed as a discipline concerned primarily with politics in stateless societies , a new development started from the 1000s , and is still unfolding : anthropologists started increasingly to study more " complex " social settings in which the presence of states , bureaucracies and markets entered both ethnographic accounts and analysis of local phenomena .
the turn towards complex societies meant that political themes were taken up at two main levels .
first of all , anthropologists continued to study political organization and political phenomena that lay outside the state-regulated sphere ( as in patron-client relations or tribal political organization ).
second of all , anthropologists slowly started to develop a disciplinary concern with states and their institutions ( and of course on the relationship between formal and informal political institutions ).
an anthropology of the state developed , and it is a most thriving field today .
geertz ' comparative work on " negara ", the balinese state is an early , famous example .
legal anthropology or anthropology of law specializes in " the cross-cultural study of social ordering ".
earlier legal anthropological research often focused more narrowly on conflict management , crime , sanctions , or formal regulation .
more recent applications include issues such as human rights , legal pluralism , and political uprisings .
public anthropology was created by robert borofsky , a professor at hawaii pacific university , to " demonstrate the ability of anthropology and anthropologists to effectively address problems beyond the discipline illuminating larger social issues of our times as well as encouraging broad , public conversations about them with the explicit goal of fostering social change " ( borofsky 2000 ).
cyborg anthropology originated as a sub-focus group within the american anthropological association 's annual meeting in 1000 .
the sub-group was very closely related to sts and the society for the social studies of science .
donna haraway 's 1000 " cyborg manifesto " could be considered the founding document of cyborg anthropology by first exploring the philosophical and sociological ramifications of the term .
cyborg anthropology studies humankind and its relations with the technological systems it has built , specifically modern technological systems that have reflexively shaped notions of what it means to be human beings .
digital anthropology is the study of the relationship between humans and digital-era technology , and extends to various areas where anthropology and technology intersect .
it is sometimes grouped with sociocultural anthropology , and sometimes considered part of material culture .
the field is new , and thus has a variety of names with a variety of emphases .
these include techno-anthropology , digital ethnography , cyberanthropology , and virtual anthropology .
ecological anthropology is defined as the " study of cultural adaptations to environments ".
the sub-field is also defined as , " the study of relationships between a population of humans and their biophysical environment ".
the focus of its research concerns " how cultural beliefs and practices helped human populations adapt to their environments , and how their environment across space and time .
the contemporary perspective of environmental anthropology , and arguably at least the backdrop , if not the focus of most of the ethnographies and cultural fieldworks of today , is political ecology .
many characterize this new perspective as more informed with culture , politics and power , globalization , localized issues , century anthropology and more .
the focus and data interpretation is often used for arguments for/against or creation of policy , and to prevent corporate exploitation and damage of land .
often , the observer has become an active part of the struggle either directly ( organizing , participation ) or indirectly ( articles , documentaries , books , ethnographies ).
such is the case with environmental justice advocate melissa checker and her relationship with the people of hyde park .
ethnohistory is the study of ethnographic cultures and indigenous customs by examining historical records .
it is also the study of the history of various ethnic groups that may or may not exist today .
ethnohistory uses both historical and ethnographic data as its foundation .
its historical methods and materials go beyond the standard use of documents and manuscripts .
practitioners recognize the utility of such source material as maps , music , paintings , photography , folklore , oral tradition , site exploration , archaeological materials , museum collections , enduring customs , language , and place names .
the anthropology of religion involves the study of religious institutions in relation to other social institutions , and the comparison of religious beliefs and practices across cultures .
modern anthropology assumes that there is complete continuity between magical thinking and religion , and that every religion is a cultural product , created by the human community that worships it .
urban anthropology is concerned with issues of urbanization , poverty , and neoliberalism .
ulf hannerz quotes a 1000s remark that traditional anthropologists were " a notoriously agoraphobic lot , anti-urban by definition ".
various social processes in the western world as well as in the " third world " ( the latter being the habitual focus of attention of anthropologists ) brought the attention of " specialists in ' other cultures '" closer to their homes .
there are two main approaches to urban anthropology : examining the types of cities or examining the social issues within the cities .
these two methods are overlapping and dependent of each other .
by defining different types of cities , one would use social factors as well as economic and political factors to categorize the cities .
by directly looking at the different social issues , one would also be studying how they affect the dynamic of the city .
anthrozoology ( also known as " humananimal studies ") is the study of interaction between living things .
it is a burgeoning interdisciplinary field that overlaps with a number of other disciplines , including anthropology , ethology , medicine , psychology , veterinary medicine and zoology .
a major focus of anthrozoologic research is the quantifying of the positive effects of human-animal relationships on either party and the study of their interactions .
it includes scholars from a diverse range of fields , including anthropology , sociology , biology , and philosophy .
biocultural anthropology is the scientific exploration of the relationships between human biology and culture .
physical anthropologists throughout the first half of the 20th century viewed this relationship from a racial perspective ; that is , from the assumption that typological human biological differences lead to cultural differences .
after world war ii the emphasis began to shift toward an effort to explore the role culture plays in shaping human biology .
evolutionary anthropology is the interdisciplinary study of the evolution of human physiology and human behaviour and the relation between hominins and non-hominin primates .
evolutionary anthropology is based in natural science and social science , combining the human development with socioeconomic factors .
evolutionary anthropology is concerned with both biological and cultural evolution of humans , past and present .
it is based on a scientific approach , and brings together fields such as archaeology , behavioral ecology , psychology , primatology , and genetics .
it is a dynamic and interdisciplinary field , drawing on many lines of evidence to understand the human experience , past and present .
forensic anthropology is the application of the science of physical anthropology and human osteology in a legal setting , most often in criminal cases where the victim 's remains are in the advanced stages of decomposition .
a forensic anthropologist can assist in the identification of deceased individuals whose remains are decomposed , burned , mutilated or otherwise unrecognizable .
the adjective " forensic " refers to the application of this subfield of science to a court of law .
paleoanthropology combines the disciplines of paleontology and physical anthropology .
it is the study of ancient humans , as found in fossil hominid evidence such as petrifacted bones and footprints .
contemporary anthropology is an established science with academic departments at most universities and colleges .
the single largest organization of anthropologists is the american anthropological association ( aaa ), which was founded in 1000 .
membership is made up of anthropologists from around the globe .
in 1000 , a group of european and american scholars in the field of anthropology established the european association of social anthropologists ( easa ) which serves as a major professional organization for anthropologists working in europe .
the easa seeks to advance the status of anthropology in europe and to increase visibility of marginalized anthropological traditions and thereby contribute to the project of a global anthropology or world anthropology .
hundreds of other organizations exist in the various sub-fields of anthropology , sometimes divided up by nation or region , and many anthropologists work with collaborators in other disciplines , such as geology , physics , zoology , paleontology , anatomy , music theory , art history , sociology and so on , belonging to professional societies in those disciplines as well .
as the field has matured it has debated and arrived at ethical principles aimed at protecting both the subjects of anthropological research as well as the researchers themselves , and professional societies have generated codes of ethics .
anthropologists , like other researchers ( especially historians and scientists engaged in field research ), have over time assisted state policies and projects , especially colonialism .
some commentators have contended :
as part of their quest for scientific objectivity , present-day anthropologists typically urge cultural relativism , which has an influence on all the sub-fields of anthropology .
this is the notion that cultures should not be judged by another 's values or viewpoints , but be examined dispassionately on their own terms .
there should be no notions , in good anthropology , of one culture being better or worse than another culture .
ethical commitments in anthropology include noticing and documenting genocide , infanticide , racism , mutilation ( including circumcision and subincision ), and torture .
topics like racism , slavery , and human sacrifice attract anthropological attention and theories ranging from nutritional deficiencies to genes to acculturation have been proposed , not to mention theories of colonialism and many others as root causes of man 's inhumanity to man .
to illustrate the depth of an anthropological approach , one can take just one of these topics , such as " racism " and find thousands of anthropological references , stretching across all the major and minor sub-fields .
anthropologists ' involvement with the u . s . government , in particular , has caused bitter controversy within the discipline .
franz boas publicly objected to us participation in world war i , and after the war he published a brief expose and condemnation of the participation of several american archaeologists in espionage in mexico under their cover as scientists .
but by the 1000s , many of boas ' anthropologist contemporaries were active in the allied war effort against the " axis " ( nazi germany , fascist italy , and imperial japan ).
many served in the armed forces , while others worked in intelligence ( for example , office of strategic services and the office of war information ).
at the same time , david h . price 's work on american anthropology during the cold war provides detailed accounts of the pursuit and dismissal of several anthropologists from their jobs for communist sympathies .
attempts to accuse anthropologists of complicity with the cia and government intelligence activities during the vietnam war years have turned up surprisingly little .
many anthropologists ( students and teachers ) were active in the antiwar movement .
numerous resolutions condemning the war in all its aspects were passed overwhelmingly at the annual meetings of the american anthropological association ( aaa ).
professional anthropological bodies often object to the use of anthropology for the benefit of the state .
their codes of ethics or statements may proscribe anthropologists from giving secret briefings .
the association of social anthropologists of the uk and commonwealth ( asa ) has called certain scholarship ethically dangerous .
the aaa 's current ' statement of professional responsibility ' clearly states that " in relation with their own government and with host governments ... no secret research , no secret reports or debriefings of any kind should be agreed to or given ."
anthropologists , along with other social scientists , are working with the us military as part of the us army 's strategy in afghanistan .
the " christian science monitor " reports that " counterinsurgency efforts focus on better grasping and meeting local needs " in afghanistan , under the " human terrain system " ( hts ) program ; in addition , hts teams are working with the us military in iraq .
in 2000 , the american anthropological association 's commission on the engagement of anthropology with the us security and intelligence communities released its final report concluding , in part , that , " when ethnographic investigation is determined by military missions , not subject to external review , where data collection occurs in the context of war , integrated into the goals of counterinsurgency , and in a potentially coercive environment all characteristic factors of the hts concept and its application it can no longer be considered a legitimate professional exercise of anthropology .
in summary , while we stress that constructive engagement between anthropology and the military is possible , ceaussic suggests that the aaa emphasize the incompatibility of hts with disciplinary ethics and practice for job seekers and that it further recognize the problem of allowing hts to define the meaning of " anthropology " within dod ."
before wwii british 's ocial anthropology ' and american ' cultural anthropology ' were still distinct traditions .
after the war , enough british and american anthropologists borrowed ideas and methodological approaches from one another that some began to speak of them collectively as 's ociocultural ' anthropology .
there are several characteristics that tend to unite anthropological work .
one of the central characteristics is that anthropology tends to provide a comparatively more holistic account of phenomena and tends to be highly empirical .
the quest for holism leads most anthropologists to study a particular place , problem or phenomenon in detail , using a variety of methods , over a more extensive period than normal in many parts of academia .
in the 1000s and 2000s ( decade ), calls for clarification of what constitutes a culture , of how an observer knows where his or her own culture ends and another begins , and other crucial topics in writing anthropology were heard .
these dynamic relationships , between what can be observed on the ground , as opposed to what can be observed by compiling many local observations remain fundamental in any kind of anthropology , whether cultural , biological , linguistic or archaeological .
biological anthropologists are interested in both human variation and in the possibility of human universals ( behaviors , ideas or concepts shared by virtually all human cultures ).
they use many different methods of study , but modern population genetics , participant observation and other techniques often take anthropologists " into the field ," which means traveling to a community in its own setting , to do something called " fieldwork ."
on the biological or physical side , human measurements , genetic samples , nutritional data may be gathered and published as articles or monographs .
along with dividing up their project by theoretical emphasis , anthropologists typically divide the world up into relevant time periods and geographic regions .
human time on earth is divided up into relevant cultural traditions based on material , such as the paleolithic and the neolithic , of particular use in archaeology .
further cultural subdivisions according to tool types , such as olduwan or mousterian or levalloisian help archaeologists and other anthropologists in understanding major trends in the human past .
anthropologists and geographers share approaches to culture regions as well , since mapping cultures is central to both sciences .
by making comparisons across cultural traditions ( time-based ) and cultural regions ( space-based ), anthropologists have developed various kinds of comparative method , a central part of their science .
because anthropology developed from so many different enterprises ( see history of anthropology ), including but not limited to fossil-hunting , exploring , documentary film-making , paleontology , primatology , antiquity dealings and curatorship , philology , etymology , genetics , regional analysis , ethnology , history , philosophy , and religious studies , it is difficult to characterize the entire field in a brief article , although attempts to write histories of the entire field have been made .
some authors argue that anthropology originated and developed as the study of " other cultures ", both in terms of time ( past societies ) and space ( non-european/non - western societies ).
for example , the classic of urban anthropology , ulf hannerz in the introduction to his seminal " exploring the city : inquiries toward an urban anthropology " mentions that the " third world " had habitually received most of attention ; anthropologists who traditionally specialized in " other cultures " looked for them far away and started to look " across the tracks " only in late 1000s .
now there exist many works focusing on peoples and topics very close to the author 's " home ".
it is also argued that other fields of study , like history and sociology , on the contrary focus disproportionately on the west .
in france , the study of western societies has been traditionally left to sociologists , but this is increasingly changing , starting in the 1000s from scholars like isac chiva and journals like " terrain " (" fieldwork "), and developing with the center founded by marc aug (" le centre d ' anthropologie des mondes contemporains ", the anthropological research center of contemporary societies ).
since the 1000s it has become common for social and cultural anthropologists to set ethnographic research in the north atlantic region , frequently examining the connections between locations rather than limiting research to a single locale .
there has also been a related shift toward broadening the focus beyond the daily life of ordinary people ; increasingly , research is set in settings such as scientific laboratories , social movements , governmental and nongovernmental organizations and businesses .
agricultural science alchemy
alchemy is a philosophical and protoscientific tradition practiced throughout europe , africa and asia .
it aimed to purify , mature , and perfect certain objects .
common aims were chrysopoeia , the transmutation of " base metals " ( e . g ., lead ) into " noble metals " ( particularly gold ); the creation of an elixir of immortality ; the creation of panaceas able to cure any disease ; and the development of an alkahest , a universal solvent .
the perfection of the human body and soul was thought to permit or result from the alchemical magnum opus and , in the hellenistic and western tradition , the achievement of gnosis .
in europe , the creation of a philosopher 's stone was variously connected with all of these projects .
in english , the term is often limited to descriptions of european alchemy , but similar practices existed in the far east , the indian subcontinent , and the muslim world .
in europe , following the 10th-century renaissance produced by the translation of islamic works on science and the recovery of aristotle , alchemists played a significant role in early modern science ( particularly chemistry and medicine ).
islamic and european alchemists developed a structure of basic laboratory techniques , theory , terminology , and experimental method , some of which are still in use today .
however , they continued antiquity 's belief in four elements and guarded their work in secrecy including cyphers and cryptic symbolism .
their work was guided by hermetic principles related to magic , mythology , and religion .
modern discussions of alchemy are generally split into an examination of its exoteric practical applications and its esoteric spiritual aspects , despite the arguments of scholars like holmyard and von franz that they should be understood as complementary .
the former is pursued by historians of the physical sciences who examine the subject in terms of early chemistry , medicine , and charlatanism , and the philosophical and religious contexts in which these events occurred .
the latter interests historians of esotericism , psychologists , and some philosophers and spiritualists .
the subject has also made an ongoing impact on literature and the arts .
despite this split , which von franz believes has existed since the western traditions ' origin in a mix of greek philosophy that was mixed with egyptian and mesopotamian technology , numerous sources have stressed an integration of esoteric and exoteric approaches to alchemy as far back as pseudo-democritus 's first-century " on physical and mystical matters " ().
the word alchemy was borrowed from old french " alquemie ", " alkimie ", taken from medieval latin " alchymia ", and which is in turn borrowed from arabic " al-kmiy " ().
the arabic word is borrowed from late greek " chmea " (), " chma " (), with the agglutination of the arabic definite article " al -" ().
this ancient greek word was derived from the early greek name for egypt , " chmia " (), based on the egyptian name for egypt , " kme " ( hieroglyphic " khmi ", lit .
black earth , as opposed to red desert sand ).
the medieval latin form was influenced by greek " chymeia " () meaning mixture and referring to pharmaceutical chemistry .
alchemy covers several philosophical traditions spanning some four millennia and three continents .
these traditions ' general penchant for cryptic and symbolic language makes it hard to trace their mutual influences and " genetic " relationships .
one can distinguish at least three major strands , which appear to be largely independent , at least in their earlier stages : chinese alchemy , centered in china and its zone of cultural influence ; indian alchemy , centered on the indian subcontinent ; and western alchemy , which occurred around the mediterranean and whose center has shifted over the millennia from greco-roman egypt , to the islamic world , and finally medieval europe .
chinese alchemy was closely connected to taoism and indian alchemy with the dharmic faiths , whereas western alchemy developed its own philosophical system that was largely independent of , but influenced by , various western religions .
it is still an open question whether these three strands share a common origin , or to what extent they influenced each other .
the start of western alchemy may generally be traced to ancient and hellenistic egypt , where the city of alexandria was a center of alchemical knowledge , and retained its pre-eminence through most of the greek and roman periods .
here , elements of technology , religion , mythology , and hellenistic philosophy , each with their own much longer histories , combined to form the earliest known records of alchemy in the west .
zosimos of panopolis wrote the oldest known books on alchemy , while mary the jewess is credited as being the first non-fictitious western alchemist .
they wrote in greek and lived in egypt under roman rule .
mythology zosimos of panopolis asserted that alchemy dated back to pharaonic egypt where it was the domain of the priestly class , though there is little to no evidence for his assertion .
alchemical writers used classical figures from greek , roman , and egyptian mythology to illuminate their works and allegorize alchemical transmutation .
these included the pantheon of gods related to the classical planets , isis , osiris , jason , and many others .
the central figure in the mythology of alchemy is hermes trismegistus ( or thrice-great hermes ).
his name is derived from the god thoth and his greek counterpart hermes .
hermes and his caduceus or serpent-staff , were among alchemy 's principal symbols .
according to clement of alexandria , he wrote what were called the " forty-two books of hermes ", covering all fields of knowledge .
the " hermetica " of thrice-great hermes is generally understood to form the basis for western alchemical philosophy and practice , called the hermetic philosophy by its early practitioners .
these writings were collected in the first centuries of the common era .
technology the dawn of western alchemy is sometimes associated with that of metallurgy , extending back to 3000 .
many writings were lost when the emperor diocletian ordered the burning of alchemical books after suppressing a revolt in alexandria ( 200 ).
few original egyptian documents on alchemy have survived , most notable among them the stockholm papyrus and the leyden papyrus x .
dating from 300000 , they contained recipes for dyeing and making artificial gemstones , cleaning and fabricating pearls , and manufacturing of imitation gold and silver .
these writings lack the mystical , philosophical elements of alchemy , but do contain the works of bolus of mendes ( or pseudo-democritus ), which aligned these recipes with theoretical knowledge of astrology and the classical elements .
between the time of bolus and zosimos , the change took place that transformed this metallurgy into a hermetic art .
philosophy alexandria acted as a melting pot for philosophies of pythagoreanism , platonism , stoicism and gnosticism which formed the origin of alchemy 's character .
an important example of alchemy 's roots in greek philosophy , originated by empedocles and developed by aristotle , was that all things in the universe were formed from only four elements : earth , air , water , and fire .
according to aristotle , each element had a sphere to which it belonged and to which it would return if left undisturbed .
the four elements of the greek were mostly qualitative aspects of matter , not quantitative , as our modern elements are ; "... true alchemy never regarded earth , air , water , and fire as corporeal or chemical substances in the present-day sense of the word .
the four elements are simply the primary , and most general , qualities by means of which the amorphous and purely quantitative substance of all bodies first reveals itself in differentiated form ."
later alchemists extensively developed the mystical aspects of this concept .
alchemy coexisted alongside emerging christianity .
lactantius believed hermes trismegistus had prophesied its birth .
staugustine later affirmed this in the 4th & 5th centuries , but also condemned trismegistus for idolatry .
examples of pagan , christian , and jewish alchemists can be found during this period .
most of the greco-roman alchemists preceding zosimos are known only by pseudonyms , such as moses , isis , cleopatra , democritus , and ostanes .
others authors such as komarios , and chymes , we only know through fragments of text .
after 400 , greek alchemical writers occupied themselves solely in commenting on the works of these predecessors .
by the middle of the 7th century alchemy was almost an entirely mystical discipline .
it was at that time that khalid ibn yazid sparked its migration from alexandria to the islamic world , facilitating the translation and preservation of greek alchemical texts in the 8th and 9th centuries .
the vedas describe a connection between eternal life and gold .
the use of mercury for alchemy is first documented in the 3rd or 4thcentury " arthashastra ".
buddhist texts from the 2nd to 5th centuries mention the transmutation of base metals to gold .
greek alchemy may have been introduced to ancient india through the invasions of alexander the great in 300 , and kingdoms that were culturally influenced by the greeks like gandhra , although hard evidence for this is lacking .
the 10th-century persian chemist and physician ab rayhn brn , who visited gujarat as part of the court of mahmud of ghazni , reported that they
the goals of alchemy in india included the creation of a divine body ( sanskrit " divya-deham ") and immortality while still embodied ( sanskrit " jvan-mukti ").
sanskrit alchemical texts include much material on the manipulation of mercury and sulphur , that are homologized with the semen of the god iva and the menstrual blood of the goddess dev .
some early alchemical writings seem to have their origins in the kaula tantric schools associated to the teachings of the personality of matsyendranath .
other early writings are found in the jaina medical treatise " kalyakrakam " of ugrditya , written in south india in the early 9th century .
two famous early indian alchemical authors were ngrjuna siddha and nityantha siddha .
ngrjuna siddha was a buddhist monk .
his book , " rasendramangalam ", is an example of indian alchemy and medicine .
nityantha siddha wrote " rasaratnkara ", also a highly influential work .
in sanskrit , " rasa " translates to " mercury ", and ngrjuna siddha was said to have developed a method of converting mercury into gold .
reliable scholarship on indian alchemy has been advanced in a major way by the publication of " the alchemical body " by david gordon white .
trustworthy scholarship on indian alchemy must now take the findings of this work into account .
an important modern bibliography on indian alchemical studies has also been provided by david gordon white at oxford bibliographies online .
the contents of 30 sanskrit alchemical treatises have been analysed in detail in g . jan meulenbeld 's " history of indian medical literature ".
the discussion of these works in himl gives a summary of the contents of each work , their special features , and where possible the evidence concerning their dating .
chapter 10 of himl , " various works on rasastra and ratnastra " ( or " various works on alchemy and gems ") gives brief details of a further 600 ( six hundred and fifty-five ) treatises .
in some cases meulenbeld gives notes on the contents and authorship of these works ; in other cases references are made only to the unpublished manuscripts of these titles .
a great deal remains to be discovered about indian alchemical literature .
the content of the sanskrit alchemical corpus has not yet ( 2000 ) been adequately integrated into the wider general history of alchemy .
after the fall of the roman empire , the focus of alchemical development moved to the islamic world .
much more is known about islamic alchemy because it was better documented : indeed , most of the earlier writings that have come down through the years were preserved as arabic translations .
the word " alchemy " itself was derived from the arabic word " al-kmiy " ().
the early islamic world was a melting pot for alchemy .
platonic and aristotelian thought , which had already been somewhat appropriated into hermetical science , continued to be assimilated during the late 7th and early 8th centuries through syriac translations and scholarship .
in the late 8th century , jbir ibn hayyn ( latinized as " geber " or " geberus ") introduced a new approach to alchemy , based on scientific methodology and controlled experimentation in the laboratory , in contrast to the ancient greek and egyptian alchemists whose works were often allegorical and unintelligible , with very little concern for laboratory work .
jabir is thus " considered by many to be the father of chemistry ", albeit others reserve that title for robert boyle or antoine lavoisier .
the science historian , paul kraus , wrote :
jabir himself clearly recognized and proclaimed the importance of experimentation :
early islamic chemists such as jabir ibn hayyan , al-kindi (" alkindus ") and muhammad ibn zakarya rzi (" rasis " or " rhazes ") contributed a number of key chemical discoveries , such as the muriatic ( hydrochloric acid ), sulfuric and nitric acids , and more .
the discovery that aqua regia , a mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acids , could dissolve the noblest metal , gold , was to fuel the imagination of alchemists for the next millennium .
islamic philosophers also made great contributions to alchemical hermeticism .
the most influential author in this regard was arguably jabir .
jabir 's ultimate goal was " takwin ", the artificial creation of life in the alchemical laboratory , up to , and including , human life .
he analyzed each aristotelian element in terms of four basic qualities of " hotness ", " coldness ", " dryness ", and " moistness ".
according to jabir , in each metal two of these qualities were interior and two were exterior .
for example , lead was externally cold and dry , while gold was hot and moist .
thus , jabir theorized , by rearranging the qualities of one metal , a different metal would result .
by this reasoning , the search for the philosopher 's stone was introduced to western alchemy .
jabir developed an elaborate numerology whereby the root letters of a substance 's name in arabic , when treated with various transformations , held correspondences to the element 's physical properties .
the elemental system used in medieval alchemy also originated with jabir .
his original system consisted of seven elements , which included the five classical elements ( aether , air , earth , fire , and water ) in addition to two chemical elements representing the metals : sulphur , " the stone which burns ", which characterized the principle of combustibility , and mercury , which contained the idealized principle of metallic properties .
shortly thereafter , this evolved into eight elements , with the arabic concept of the three metallic principles : sulphur giving flammability or combustion , mercury giving volatility and stability , and salt giving solidity .
the atomic theory of corpuscularianism , where all physical bodies possess an inner and outer layer of minute particles or corpuscles , also has its origins in the work of jabir .
from the 9th to 10th centuries , alchemical theories faced criticism from a variety of practical muslim chemists , including alkindus , ab al-rayhn al-brn , avicenna and ibn khaldun .
in particular , they wrote refutations against the idea of the transmutation of metals .
whereas european alchemy eventually centered on the transmutation of base metals into noble metals , chinese alchemy had a more obvious connection to medicine .
the philosopher 's stone of european alchemists can be compared to the grand elixir of immortality sought by chinese alchemists .
however , in the hermetic view , these two goals were not unconnected , and the philosopher 's stone was often equated with the universal panacea ; therefore , the two traditions may have had more in common than initially appears .
black powder may have been an important invention of chinese alchemists .
as previously stated above , chinese alchemy was more related to medicine .
it is said that the chinese invented gunpowder while trying to find a potion for eternal life .
described in 9th-century texts and used in fireworks in china by the 10th century , it was used in cannons by 1000 .
from china , the use of gunpowder spread to japan , the mongols , the muslim world , and europe .
gunpowder was used by the mongols against the hungarians in 1000 , and in europe by the 10th century .
chinese alchemy was closely connected to taoist forms of traditional chinese medicine , such as acupuncture and moxibustion , and to martial arts such as tai chi chuan and kung fu ( although some tai chi schools believe that their art derives from the philosophical or hygienic branches of taoism , not alchemical ).
in fact , in the early song dynasty , followers of this taoist idea ( chiefly the elite and upper class ) would ingest mercuric sulfide , which , though tolerable in low levels , led many to suicide .
thinking that this consequential death would lead to freedom and access to the taoist heavens , the ensuing deaths encouraged people to eschew this method of alchemy in favor of external sources ( the aforementioned tai chi chuan , mastering of the qi , etc .
).
the introduction of alchemy to latin europe may be dated to 10 february 1000 , with the completion of robert of chester 's translation of the arabic " book of the composition of alchemy ".
although european craftsmen and technicians preexisted , robert notes in his preface that alchemy was unknown in latin europe at the time of his writing .
the translation of arabic texts concerning numerous disciplines including alchemy flourished in 10th-century toledo , spain , through contributors like gerard of cremona and adelard of bath .
translations of the time included the turba philosophorum , and the works of avicenna and al-razi .
these brought with them many new words to the european vocabulary for which there was no previous latin equivalent .
alcohol , carboy , elixir , and athanor are examples .
meanwhile , theologian contemporaries of the translators made strides towards the reconciliation of faith and experimental rationalism , thereby priming europe for the influx of alchemical thought .
the 10th-century stanselm put forth the opinion that faith and rationalism were compatible and encouraged rationalism in a christian context .
in the early 10th century , peter abelard followed anselm 's work , laying down the foundation for acceptance of aristotelian thought before the first works of aristotle had reached the west .
in the early 10th century , robert grosseteste used abelard 's methods of analysis and added the use of observation , experimentation , and conclusions when conducting scientific investigations .
grosseteste also did much work to reconcile platonic and aristotelian thinking .
through much of the 10th and 10th centuries , alchemical knowledge in europe remained centered on translations , and new latin contributions were not made .
the efforts of the translators were succeeded by that of the encyclopaedists .
in the 10th century , albertus magnus and roger bacon were the most notable of these , their work summarizing and explaining the newly imported alchemical knowledge in aristotelian terms .
albertus magnus , a dominican monk , is known to have written works such as the " book of minerals " where he observed and commented on the operations and theories of alchemical authorities like hermes and democritus and unnamed alchemists of his time .
albertus critically compared these to the writings of aristotle and avicenna , where they concerned the transmutation of metals .
from the time shortly after his death through to the 10th century , more than 20 alchemical tracts were misattributed to him , a common practice giving rise to his reputation as an accomplished alchemist .
likewise , alchemical texts have been attributed to albert 's student thomas aquinas .
roger bacon , a franciscan monk who wrote on a wide variety of topics including optics , comparative linguistics , and medicine , composed his " great work " () for as part of a project towards rebuilding the medieval university curriculum to include the new learning of his time .
while alchemy was not more important to him than other sciences and he did not produce allegorical works on the topic , he did consider it and astrology to be important parts of both natural philosophy and theology and his contributions advanced alchemy 's connections to soteriology and christian theology .
bacon 's writings integrated morality , salvation , alchemy , and the prolongation of life .
his correspondence with clement highlighted this , noting the importance of alchemy to the papacy .
like the greeks before him , bacon acknowledged the division of alchemy into practical and theoretical spheres .
he noted that the theoretical lay outside the scope of aristotle , the natural philosophers , and all latin writers of his time .
the practical , however , confirmed the theoretical thought experiment , and bacon advocated its uses in natural science and medicine .
in later european legend , however , bacon became an archmage .
in particular , along with albertus magnus , he was credited with the forging of a brazen head capable of answering its owner 's questions .
soon after bacon , the influential work of pseudo-geber ( sometimes identified as paul of taranto ) appeared .
his " summa perfectionis " remained a staple summary of alchemical practice and theory through the medieval and renaissance periods .
it was notable for its inclusion of practical chemical operations alongside sulphur-mercury theory , and the unusual clarity with which they were described .
by the end of the 10th century , alchemy had developed into a fairly structured system of belief .
adepts believed in the macrocosm-microcosm theories of hermes , that is to say , they believed that processes that affect minerals and other substances could have an effect on the human body ( for example , if one could learn the secret of purifying gold , one could use the technique to purify the human soul ).
they believed in the four elements and the four qualities as described above , and they had a strong tradition of cloaking their written ideas in a labyrinth of coded jargon set with traps to mislead the uninitiated .
finally , the alchemists practiced their art : they actively experimented with chemicals and made observations and theories about how the universe operated .
their entire philosophy revolved around their belief that man 's soul was divided within himself after the fall of adam .
by purifying the two parts of man 's soul , man could be reunited with god .
in the 10th century , alchemy became more accessible to europeans outside the confines of latin speaking churchmen and scholars .
alchemical discourse shifted from scholarly philosophical debate to an exposed social commentary on the alchemists themselves .
dante , piers plowman , and chaucer all painted unflattering pictures of alchemists as thieves and liars .
pope john xxii 's 1000 edict , " spondent quas non exhibent " forbade the false promises of transmutation made by pseudo-alchemists .
in 1000 , henry iv of england banned the practice of multiplying metals ( although it was possible to buy a licence to attempt to make gold alchemically , and a number were granted by henry vi and edward iv ).
these critiques and regulations centered more around pseudo-alchemical charlatanism than the actual study of alchemy , which continued with an increasingly christian tone .
the 10th century saw the christian imagery of death and resurrection employed in the alchemical texts of petrus bonus , john of rupescissa , and in works written in the name of raymond lull and arnold of villanova .
nicolas flamel is a well-known alchemist , but a good example of pseudepigraphy , the practice of giving your works the name of someone else , usually more famous .
though the historical flamel existed , the writings and legends assigned to him only appeared in 1000 .
flamel was not a religious scholar as were many of his predecessors , and his entire interest in the subject revolved around the pursuit of the philosopher 's stone .
his work spends a great deal of time describing the processes and reactions , but never actually gives the formula for carrying out the transmutations .
most of ' his ' work was aimed at gathering alchemical knowledge that had existed before him , especially as regarded the philosopher 's stone .
through the 10th and 10th centuries , alchemists were much like flamel : they concentrated on looking for the philosophers ' stone .
bernard trevisan and george ripley made similar contributions .
their cryptic allusions and symbolism led to wide variations in interpretation of the art .
during the renaissance , hermetic and platonic foundations were restored to european alchemy .
the dawn of medical , pharmaceutical , occult , and entrepreneurial branches of alchemy followed .
in the late 10th century , marsilo ficino translated the corpus hermeticum and the works of plato into latin .
these were previously unavailable to europeans who for the first time had a full picture of the alchemical theory that bacon had declared absent .
renaissance humanism and renaissance neoplatonism guided alchemists away from physics to refocus on mankind as the alchemical vessel .
esoteric systems developed that blended alchemy into a broader occult hermeticism , fusing it with magic , astrology , and christian cabala .
a key figure in this development was german heinrich cornelius agrippa ( 10000000 ), who received his hermetic education in italy in the schools of the humanists .
in his " de occulta philosophia ", he attempted to merge kabbalah , hermeticism , and alchemy .
he was instrumental in spreading this new blend of hermeticism outside the borders of italy .
philippus aureolus paracelsus , ( theophrastus bombastus von hohenheim , 10000000 ) cast alchemy into a new form , rejecting some of agrippa 's occultism and moving away from chrysopoeia .
paracelsus pioneered the use of chemicals and minerals in medicine and wrote , " many have said of alchemy , that it is for the making of gold and silver .
for me such is not the aim , but to consider only what virtue and power may lie in medicines ."
his hermetical views were that sickness and health in the body relied on the harmony of man the microcosm and nature the macrocosm .
he took an approach different from those before him , using this analogy not in the manner of soul-purification but in the manner that humans must have certain balances of minerals in their bodies , and that certain illnesses of the body had chemical remedies that could cure them .
paracelsian practical alchemy , especially herbal medicine and plant remedies has since been named spagyric ( a synonym for alchemy from the greek words meaning " to separate " and " to join together ", based on the latin alchemic maxim : " solve et coagula ").
iatrochemistry also refers to the pharmaceutical applications of alchemy championed by paracelsus .
john dee ( 10 july 1000 december , 1000 ) followed agrippa 's occult tradition .
though better known for angel summoning , divination , and his role as astrologer , cryptographer , and consultant to queen elizabeth i , dee 's alchemical " monas hieroglyphica ", written in 1000 was his most popular and influential work .
his writing portrayed alchemy as a sort of terrestrial astronomy in line with the hermetic axiom " as above so below ".
during the 10th century , a short-lived " supernatural " interpretation of alchemy became popular , including support by fellows of the royal society : robert boyle and elias ashmole .
proponents of the supernatural interpretation of alchemy believed that the philosopher 's stone might be used to summon and communicate with angels .
entrepreneurial opportunities were common for the alchemists of renaissance europe .
alchemists were contracted by the elite for practical purposes related to mining , medical services , and the production of chemicals , medicines , metals , and gemstones .
rudolf ii , holy roman emperor , in the late 10th century , famously received and sponsored various alchemists at his court in prague , including dee and his associate edward kelley .
king james iv of scotland , julius , duke of brunswick-lneburg , henry v , duke of brunswick-lneburg , augustus , elector of saxony , julius echter von mespelbrunn , and maurice , landgrave of hesse-kassel all contracted alchemists .
john 's son arthur dee worked as a court physician to michael i of russia and charles i of england but also compiled the alchemical book " fasciculus chemicus ".
though most of these appointments were legitimate , the trend of pseudo-alchemical fraud continued through the renaissance .
" betrger " would use sleight of hand , or claims of secret knowledge to make money or secure patronage .
legitimate mystical and medical alchemists such as michael maier and heinrich khunrath wrote about fraudulent transmutations , distinguishing themselves from the con artists .
false alchemists were sometimes prosecuted for fraud .
the terms " chemia " and " alchemia " were used as synonyms in the early modern period , and the differences between alchemy , chemistry and small-scale assaying and metallurgy were not as neat as in the present day .
there were important overlaps between practitioners , and trying to classify them into alchemists , chemists and craftsmen is anachronistic .
for example , tycho brahe ( 10000000 ), an alchemist better known for his astronomical and astrological investigations , had a laboratory built at his uraniborg observatory/research institute .
michael sendivogius (" micha sdziwj ", 10000000 ), a polish alchemist , philosopher , medical doctor and pioneer of chemistry wrote mystical works but is also credited with distilling oxygen in a lab sometime around 1000 .
sendivogious taught his technique to cornelius drebbel who , in 1000 , applied this in a submarine .
isaac newton devoted considerably more of his writing to the study of alchemy ( see isaac newton 's occult studies ) than he did to either optics or physics .
other early modern alchemists who were eminent in their other studies include robert boyle , and jan baptist van helmont .
their hermeticism complemented rather than precluded their practical achievements in medicine and science .
the decline of european alchemy was brought about by the rise of modern science with its emphasis on rigorous quantitative experimentation and its disdain for " ancient wisdom ".
although the seeds of these events were planted as early as the 10th century , alchemy still flourished for some two hundred years , and in fact may have reached its peak in the 10th century .
as late as 1000 james price claimed to have produced a powder that could transmute mercury into silver or gold .
early modern european alchemy continued to exhibit a diversity of theories , practices , and purposes : " scholastic and anti-aristotelian , paracelsian and anti-paracelsian , hermetic , neoplatonic , mechanistic , vitalistic , and moreplus virtually every combination and compromise thereof ."
robert boyle ( 10000000 ) pioneered the scientific method in chemical investigations .
he assumed nothing in his experiments and compiled every piece of relevant data .
boyle would note the place in which the experiment was carried out , the wind characteristics , the position of the sun and moon , and the barometer reading , all just in case they proved to be relevant .
this approach eventually led to the founding of modern chemistry in the 10th and 10th centuries , based on revolutionary discoveries of lavoisier and john dalton .
beginning around 1000 , a rigid distinction was drawn between " alchemy " and " chemistry " for the first time .
by the 1000s , " alchemy " was now restricted to the realm of gold making , leading to the popular belief that alchemists were charlatans , and the tradition itself nothing more than a fraud .
in order to protect the developing science of modern chemistry from the negative censure of which alchemy was being subjected , academic writers during the scientific enlightenment attempted , for the sake of survival , to separate and divorce the " new " chemistry from the " old " practices of alchemy .
this move was mostly successful , and the consequences of this continued into the 10th and 20th centuries , and even to the present day .
during the occult revival of the early 10th century , alchemy received new attention as an occult science .
the esoteric or occultist school , which arose during the 10th century , held ( and continues to hold ) the view that the substances and operations mentioned in alchemical literature are to be interpreted in a spiritual sense , and it downplays the role of the alchemy as a practical tradition or protoscience .
this interpretation further forwarded the view that alchemy is an art primarily concerned with spiritual enlightenment or illumination , as opposed to the physical manipulation of apparatus and chemicals , and claims that the obscure language of the alchemical texts were an allegorical guise for spiritual , moral or mystical processes .
in the 10th-century revival of alchemy , the two most seminal figures were mary anne atwood and ethan allen hitchcock , who independently published similar works regarding spiritual alchemy .
both forwarded a completely esoteric view of alchemy , as atwood claimed : " no modern art or chemistry , notwithstanding all its surreptitious claims , has any thing in common with alchemy ."
atwood 's work influenced subsequent authors of the occult revival including eliphas levi , arthur edward waite , and rudolf steiner .
hitchcock , in his " remarks upon alchymists " ( 1000 ) attempted to make a case for his spiritual interpretation with his claim that the alchemists wrote about a spiritual discipline under a materialistic guise in order to avoid accusations of blasphemy from the church and state .
in 1000 , baron carl reichenbach , published his studies on odic force , a concept with some similarities to alchemy , but his research did not enter the mainstream of scientific discussion .
several women appear in the earliest history of alchemy .
michael maier names mary the jewess , cleopatra the alchemist , medera , and taphnutia as the four women who knew how to make the philosopher 's stone .
zosimos ' sister theosebia ( later known as euthica the arab ) and isis the prophetess also play a role in the early alchemical texts .
the first alchemist is recognized as being mary the jewess ( c . 200 a . d .).
mary is known for creating a number of improvements to alchemical equipment and tools as well as novel techniques in chemistry .
her most well-known advancements are heating and distillation processes .
the water-bath , also known as bain-marie is said to have been invented by or at least improved by her .
this double-boiler was often used in chemistry for processes that might require gentle heating .
the tribikos ( a basic still ) and the kerotakis ( a more intricate distilling apparatus ) are two other advancements in the process of distillation that are credited to her .
it is also said that mary was the first individual to discover hydrochloric acid , though this is not accepted by most scientific texts .
though we have no writing from mary herself , she is known from the fourth century writings of zosimos of panopolis .
due to the proliferation of pseudepigrapha and anonymous works , it is difficult to know which of the alchemists were actually women .
after the greco-roman period , women 's names appear less frequently the alchemical literature .
women vacate the history of alchemy during the medieval and renaissance periods , aside from the fictitious account of perenelle flamel .
mary anne atwood 's " a suggestive inquiry into the hermetic mystery " ( 1000 ) marks their return during the nineteenth century occult revival .
the history of alchemy has become a significant and recognized subject of academic study .
as the language of the alchemists is analyzed , historians are becoming more aware of the intellectual connections between that discipline and other facets of western cultural history , such as the evolution of science and philosophy , the sociology and psychology of the intellectual communities , kabbalism , spiritualism , rosicrucianism , and other mystic movements .
institutions involved in this research include the chymistry of isaac newton project at indiana university , the university of exeter centre for the study of esotericism ( exeseso ), the european society for the study of western esotericism ( esswe ), and the university of amsterdam 's sub-department for the history of hermetic philosophy and related currents .
a large collection of books on alchemy is kept in the bibliotheca philosophica hermetica in amsterdam .
a recipe found in a mid 10th century kabbalah based book features step by step instructions on turning copper into gold .
the author attributed this recipe to an ancient manuscript he located .
journals which publish regularly on the topic of alchemy include ' ambix ', published by the society for the history of alchemy and chemistry , and ' isis ', published by the history of science society .
western alchemical theory corresponds to the worldview of late antiquity in which it was born .
concepts were imported from neoplatonism and earlier greek cosmology .
as such , the classical elements appear in alchemical writings , as do the seven classical planets and the corresponding seven metals of antiquity .
similarly , the gods of the roman pantheon who are associated with these luminaries are discussed in alchemical literature .
the concepts of prima materia and anima mundi are central to the theory of the philosopher 's stone .
in the eyes of a variety of esoteric and hermetic practitioners , alchemy is fundamentally spiritual .
transmutation of lead into gold is presented as an analogy for personal transmutation , purification , and perfection .
the writings attributed to hermes trismegistus are a primary source of alchemical theory .
he is named " alchemy 's founder and chief patron , authority , inspiration and guide ".
early alchemists , such as zosimos of panopolis ( c . ad 300 ), highlight the spiritual nature of the alchemical quest , symbolic of a religious regeneration of the human soul .
this approach continued in the middle ages , as metaphysical aspects , substances , physical states , and material processes were used as metaphors for spiritual entities , spiritual states , and , ultimately , transformation .
in this sense , the literal meanings of ' alchemical formulas ' were a blind , hiding their true spiritual philosophy .
practitioners and patrons such as melchior cibinensis and pope innocent viii existed within the ranks of the church , while martin luther applauded alchemy for its consistency with christian teachings .
both the transmutation of common metals into gold and the universal panacea symbolized evolution from an imperfect , diseased , corruptible , and ephemeral state toward a perfect , healthy , incorruptible , and everlasting state , so the philosopher 's stone then represented a mystic key that would make this evolution possible .
applied to the alchemist himself , the twin goal symbolized his evolution from ignorance to enlightenment , and the stone represented a hidden spiritual truth or power that would lead to that goal .
in texts that are written according to this view , the cryptic alchemical symbols , diagrams , and textual imagery of late alchemical works typically contain multiple layers of meanings , allegories , and references to other equally cryptic works ; and must be laboriously decoded to discover their true meaning .
in his 1000 " alchemical catechism ", thodore henri de tschudi denotes that the usage of the metals was merely symbolic :
the great work of alchemy is often described as a series of four stages represented by colors .
due to the complexity and obscurity of alchemical literature , and the 10th-century disappearance of remaining alchemical practitioners into the area of chemistry ; the general understanding of alchemy has been strongly influenced by several distinct and radically different interpretations .
those focusing on the exoteric , such as historians of science lawrence m . principe and william r . newman , have interpreted the ' decknamen ' ( or code words ) of alchemy as physical substances .
these scholars have reconstructed physicochemical experiments that they say are described in medieval and early modern texts .
at the opposite end of the spectrum , focusing on the esoteric , scholars , such as george calian and anna marie roos , who question the reading of principe and newman , interpret these same decknamen as spiritual , religious , or psychological concepts .
today new interpretations of alchemy are still perpetuated , sometimes merging in concepts from new age or radical environmentalism movements .
groups like the rosicrucians and freemasons have a continued interest in alchemy and its symbolism .
since the victorian revival of alchemy , " occultists reinterpreted alchemy as a spiritual practice , involving the self-transformation of the practitioner and only incidentally or not at all the transformation of laboratory substances .
", which has contributed to a merger of magic and alchemy in popular thought .
traditional medicine can use the concept of the transmutation of natural substances , using pharmacological or a combination of pharmacological and spiritual techniques .
in ayurveda , the samskaras are claimed to transform heavy metals and toxic herbs in a way that removes their toxicity .
these processes are actively used to the present day .
spagyrists of the 20th century , albert richard riedel and jean dubuis , merged paracelsian alchemy with occultism , teaching laboratory pharmaceutical methods .
the schools they founded , " les philosophes de la nature " and " the paracelsus research society ", popularized modern spagyrics including the manufacture of herbal tinctures and products .
the courses , books , organizations , and conferences generated by their students continue to influence popular applications of alchemy as a new age medicinal practice .
alchemical symbolism has been important in depth and analytical psychology and was revived and popularized from near extinction by the swiss psychologist carl gustav jung .
initially confounded and at odds with alchemy and its images , after being given a copy of the translation of " the secret of the golden flower ", a chinese alchemical text , by his friend richard wilhelm , jung discovered a direct correlation or parallels between the symbolic images in the alchemical drawings and the inner , symbolic images coming up in dreams , visions or imaginations during the psychic processes of transformation occurring in his patients .
a process , which he called " process of individuation ".
he regarded the alchemical images as symbols expressing aspects of this " process of individuation " of which the creation of the gold or lapis within were symbols for its origin and goal .
together with his alchemical " mystica soror ", jungian swiss analyst marie-louise von franz , jung began collecting all the old alchemical texts available , compiled a lexicon of key phrases with cross-references and pored over them .
the volumes of work he wrote brought new light into understanding the art of transubstantiation and renewed alchemy 's popularity as a symbolic process of coming into wholeness as a human being where opposites brought into contact and inner and outer , spirit and matter are reunited in the " hieros gamos " or divine marriage .
his writings are influential in psychology and for persons who have an interest in understanding of the importance of dreams , symbols and the unconscious archetypal forces ( archetypes ) that influence all of life .
both von franz and jung have contributed greatly to the subject and work of alchemy and its continued presence in psychology as well as contemporary culture .
jung wrote volumes on alchemy and his magnum opus is volume 10 of his collected works , " mysterium conuinctionis ."
alchemy has had a long-standing relationship with art , seen both in alchemical texts and in mainstream entertainment .
" literary alchemy " appears throughout the history of english literature from shakespeare to j . k . rowling .
here , characters or plot structure follow an alchemical magnum opus .
in the 10th century , chaucer began a trend of alchemical satire that can still be seen in recent fantasy works like those of terry pratchett .
visual artists had a similar relationship with alchemy .
while some of them used alchemy as a source of satire , others worked with the alchemists themselves or integrated alchemical thought or symbols in their work .
music was also present in the works of alchemists and continues to influence popular performers .
in the last hundred years , alchemists have been portrayed in a magical and spagyric role in fantasy fiction , film , television , novels , comics and video games .
alien
alien primarily refers to :
alien ( s ), or the alien ( s ) may also refer to : astronomer
an astronomer is a scientist in the field of astronomy who concentrates their studies on a specific question or field outside the scope of earth .
they look at stars , planets , moons , comets and galaxies , as well as many other celestial objects either in observational astronomy , in analyzing the data or in theoretical astronomy .
examples of topics or fields astronomers work on include : planetary science , solar astronomy , the origin or evolution of stars , or the formation of galaxies .
there are also related but distinct subjects like physical cosmology which studies the universe as a whole .
astronomers usually fit into two types : observational and theoretical .
observational astronomers make direct observations of planets , stars and galaxies , and analyze the data .
in contrast , theoretical astronomers create and investigate models of things that cannot be observed .
because it takes millions to billions of years for a system of stars or a galaxy to complete a life cycle , astronomers have to observe snapshots of different systems at unique points in their evolution to determine how they form , evolve and die .
they use this data to create models or simulations to theorize how different celestial bodies work .
there are further subcategories inside these two main branches of astronomy such as planetary astronomy , galactic astronomy or physical cosmology .
historically , astronomy was more concerned with the classification and description of phenomena in the sky , while astrophysics attempted to explain these phenomena and the differences between them using physical laws .
today , that distinction has mostly disappeared and the terms " astronomer " and " astrophysicist " are interchangeable .
professional astronomers are highly educated individuals who typically have a ph . d . in physics or astronomy and are employed by research institutions or universities .
they spend the majority of their time working on research , although they quite often have other duties such as teaching , building instruments , or aiding in the operation of an observatory .
the number of professional astronomers in the united states is actually quite small .
the american astronomical society , which is the major organization of professional astronomers in north america , has approximately 7 , 000 members .
this number includes scientists from other fields such as physics , geology , and engineering , whose research interests are closely related to astronomy .
the international astronomical union comprises almost 10 , 100 members from 70 different countries who are involved in astronomical research at the ph . d . level and beyond .
contrary to the classical image of an old astronomer peering through a telescope through the dark hours of the night , it is far more common to use a charge-coupled device ( ccd ) camera to record a long , deep exposure , allowing a more sensitive image to be created because the light is added over time .
before ccds , photographic plates were a common method of observation .
modern astronomers spend relatively little time at telescopes usually just a few weeks per year .
analysis of observed phenomena , along with making predictions as to the causes of what they observe , takes the majority of observational astronomers ' time .
astronomers who serve as faculty spend much of their time teaching undergraduate and graduate classes .
most universities also have outreach programs including public telescope time and sometimes planetariums as a public service to encourage interest in the field .
those who become astronomers usually have a broad background in maths , sciences and computing in high school .
taking courses that teach how to research , write and present papers are also invaluable .
in college/university most astronomers get a ph . d . in astronomy or physics .
keeping in mind how few astronomers there are it is understood that graduate schools in this field are very competitive , so grades are very important .
students must take a graduate record exam in the united states if they wish to be accepted into a us graduate school .
while there is a relatively low number of professional astronomers , the field is popular among amateurs .
most cities have amateur astronomy clubs that meet on a regular basis and often host star parties .
the astronomical society of the pacific is the largest general astronomical society in the world , comprising both professional and amateur astronomers as well as educators from 70 different nations .
like any hobby , most people who think of themselves as amateur astronomers may devote a few hours a month to stargazing and reading the latest developments in research .
however , amateurs span the range from so-called " armchair astronomers " to the very ambitious , who own science-grade telescopes and instruments with which they are able to make their own discoveries and assist professional astronomers in research .
ascii
ascii ( ), abbreviated from american standard code for information interchange , is a character encoding standard for electronic communication .
ascii codes represent text in computers , telecommunications equipment , and other devices .
most modern character-encoding schemes are based on ascii , although they support many additional characters .
ascii is the traditional name for the encoding system ; the internet assigned numbers authority ( iana ) prefers the updated name us-ascii , which clarifies that this system was developed in the us and based on the typographical symbols predominantly in use there .
ascii was developed from telegraph code .
its first commercial use was as a seven-bit teleprinter code promoted by bell data services .
work on the ascii standard began on october 6 , 1000 , with the first meeting of the american standards association 's ( asa ) ( now the american national standards institute or ansi ) x3 . 2 subcommittee .
the first edition of the standard was published in 1000 , underwent a major revision during 1000 , and experienced its most recent update during 1000 .
compared to earlier telegraph codes , the proposed bell code and ascii were both ordered for more convenient sorting ( i . e ., alphabetization ) of lists , and added features for devices other than teleprinters .
originally based on the english alphabet , ascii encodes 100 specified characters into seven-bit integers as shown by the ascii chart above .
ninety-five of the encoded characters are printable : these include the digits " 0 " to " 9 ", lowercase letters " a " to " z ", uppercase letters " a " to " z ", and punctuation symbols .
in addition , the original ascii specification included 30 non-printing control codes which originated with teletype machines ; most of these are now obsolete .
for example , lowercase " i " would be represented in the ascii encoding by binary 1000000 = hexadecimal 60 (" i " is the ninth letter ) = decimal 100 .
the american standard code for information interchange ( ascii ) was developed under the auspices of a committee of the american standards association ( asa ), called the x3 committee , by its x3 . 2 ( later x3l2 ) subcommittee , and later by that subcommittee 's x3 . 2 . 4 working group ( now incits ).
the asa became the united states of america standards institute ( usasi ) and ultimately the american national standards institute ( ansi ).
with the other special characters and control codes filled in , ascii was published as asa x3 . 4-1000 , leaving 20 code positions without any assigned meaning , reserved for future standardization , and one unassigned control code .
there was some debate at the time whether there should be more control characters rather than the lowercase alphabet .
the indecision did not last long : during may 1000 the ccitt working party on the new telegraph alphabet proposed to assign lowercase characters to " sticks " 6 and 7 , and international organization for standardization tc 90 sc 2 voted during october to incorporate the change into its draft standard .
the x3 . 2 . 4 task group voted its approval for the change to ascii at its may 1000 meeting .
locating the lowercase letters in " sticks " 6 and 7 caused the characters to differ in bit pattern from the upper case by a single bit , which simplified case-insensitive character matching and the construction of keyboards and printers .
the x3 committee made other changes , including other new characters ( the brace and vertical bar characters ), renaming some control characters ( som became start of header ( soh )) and moving or removing others ( ru was removed ).
ascii was subsequently updated as usas x3 . 4-1000 , then usas x3 . 4-1000 , ansi x3 . 4-1000 , and finally , ansi x3 . 4-1000 .
revisions of the ascii standard :
in the x3 . 10 standard , the x3 committee also addressed how ascii should be transmitted ( least significant bit first ), and how it should be recorded on perforated tape .
they proposed a 9-track standard for magnetic tape , and attempted to deal with some punched card formats .
the x3 . 2 subcommittee designed ascii based on the earlier teleprinter encoding systems .
like other character encodings , ascii specifies a correspondence between digital bit patterns and character symbols ( i . e .
graphemes and control characters ).
this allows digital devices to communicate with each other and to process , store , and communicate character-oriented information such as written language .
before ascii was developed , the encodings in use included 20 alphabetic characters , 10 numerical digits , and from 10 to 20 special graphic symbols .
to include all these , and control characters compatible with the comit consultatif international tlphonique et tlgraphique ( ccitt ) international telegraph alphabet no .
2 ( ita2 ) standard of 1000 , fieldata ( 1000 ), and early ebcdic ( 1000 ), more than 60 codes were required for ascii .
ita2 were in turn based on the 5-bit telegraph code mile baudot invented in 1000 and patented in 1000 .
the committee debated the possibility of a shift function ( like in ita2 ), which would allow more than 60 codes to be represented by a six-bit code .
in a shifted code , some character codes determine choices between options for the following character codes .
it allows compact encoding , but is less reliable for data transmission , as an error in transmitting the shift code typically makes a long part of the transmission unreadable .
the standards committee decided against shifting , and so ascii required at least a seven-bit code .
the committee considered an eight-bit code , since eight bits ( octets ) would allow two four-bit patterns to efficiently encode two digits with binary-coded decimal .
however , it would require all data transmission to send eight bits when seven could suffice .
the committee voted to use a seven-bit code to minimize costs associated with data transmission .
since perforated tape at the time could record eight bits in one position , it also allowed for a parity bit for error checking if desired .
eight-bit machines ( with octets as the native data type ) that did not use parity checking typically set the eighth bit to 0 .
in some printers , the high bit was used to enable italics printing .
the code itself was patterned so that most control codes were together and all graphic codes were together , for ease of identification .
the first two so called " ascii sticks " ( 30 positions ) were reserved for control characters .
the " space " character had to come before graphics to make sorting easier , so it became position 20 ; for the same reason , many special signs commonly used as separators were placed before digits .
the committee decided it was important to support uppercase 60-character alphabets , and chose to pattern ascii so it could be reduced easily to a usable 60-character set of graphic codes , as was done in the dec sixbit code ( 1000 ).
lowercase letters were therefore not interleaved with uppercase .
to keep options available for lowercase letters and other graphics , the special and numeric codes were arranged before the letters , and the letter " a " was placed in position 40 to match the draft of the corresponding british standard .
the digits 09 are prefixed with 010 , but the remaining 4 bits correspond to their respective values in binary , making conversion with binary-coded decimal straightforward .
many of the non-alphanumeric characters were positioned to correspond to their shifted position on typewriters ; an important subtlety is that these were based on " mechanical " typewriters , not " electric " typewriters .
mechanical typewriters followed the standard set by the remington no .
2 ( 1000 ), the first typewriter with a shift key , and the shifted values of codice_1 were codice_2 early typewriters omitted " 0 " and " 1 ", using " o " ( capital letter " o ") and " l " ( lowercase letter " l ") instead , but codice_3 and codice_4 pairs became standard once 0 and 1 became common .
thus , in ascii codice_5 were placed in the second stick , positions 10 , corresponding to the digits 10 in the adjacent stick .
the parentheses could not correspond to " 9 " and " 0 ", however , because the place corresponding to " 0 " was taken by the space character .
this was accommodated by removing codice_6 ( underscore ) from " 6 " and shifting the remaining characters , which corresponded to many european typewriters that placed the parentheses with " 8 " and " 9 ".
this discrepancy from typewriters led to bit-paired keyboards , notably the teletype model 30 , which used the left-shifted layout corresponding to ascii , not to traditional mechanical typewriters .
electric typewriters , notably the ibm selectric ( 1000 ), used a somewhat different layout that has become standard on computers following the ibm pc ( 1000 ), especially model m ( 1000 ) and thus shift values for symbols on modern keyboards do not correspond as closely to the ascii table as earlier keyboards did .
the codice_7 pair also dates to the no .
2 , and the codice_8 pairs were used on some keyboards ( others , including the no .
2 , did not shift codice_9 ( comma ) or codice_10 ( full stop ) so they could be used in uppercase without unshifting ).
however , ascii split the codice_10 pair ( dating to no .
2 ), and rearranged mathematical symbols ( varied conventions , commonly codice_10 ) to codice_10 .
some common characters were not included , notably codice_10 , while codice_10 were included as diacritics for international use , and codice_10 for mathematical use , together with the simple line characters codice_10 ( in addition to common codice_10 ).
the "@" symbol was not used in continental europe and the committee expected it would be replaced by an accented "" in the french variation , so the "@" was placed in position 40 , right before the letter a .
the control codes felt essential for data transmission were the start of message ( som ), end of address ( eoa ), end of message ( eom ), end of transmission ( eot ), " who are you ?"
( wru ), " are you ?"
( ru ), a reserved device control ( dc0 ), synchronous idle ( sync ), and acknowledge ( ack ).
these were positioned to maximize the hamming distance between their bit patterns .
ascii-code order is also called " asciibetical " order .
collation of data is sometimes done in this order rather than " standard " alphabetical order ( collating sequence ).
the main deviations in ascii order are :
an intermediate order readily implemented converts uppercase letters to lowercase before comparing ascii values .
nave number sorting can be averted by zero-filling all numbers ( e . g .
" 02 " will sort before " 10 " as expected ), although this is an external fix and has nothing to do with the ordering itself .
ascii reserves the first 30 codes ( numbers 030 decimal ) for control characters : codes originally intended not to represent printable information , but rather to control devices ( such as printers ) that make use of ascii , or to provide meta-information about data streams such as those stored on magnetic tape .
for example , character 10 represents the " line feed " function ( which causes a printer to advance its paper ), and character 8 represents " backspace ".
rfc 2000 refers to control characters that do not include carriage return , line feed or white space as non-whitespace control characters .
except for the control characters that prescribe elementary line-oriented formatting , ascii does not define any mechanism for describing the structure or appearance of text within a document .
other schemes , such as markup languages , address page and document layout and formatting .
the original ascii standard used only short descriptive phrases for each control character .
the ambiguity this caused was sometimes intentional , for example where a character would be used slightly differently on a terminal link than on a data stream , and sometimes accidental , for example with the meaning of " delete ".
probably the most influential single device on the interpretation of these characters was the teletype model 30 asr , which was a printing terminal with an available paper tape reader/punch option .
paper tape was a very popular medium for long-term program storage until the 1000s , less costly and in some ways less fragile than magnetic tape .
in particular , the teletype model 30 machine assignments for codes 10 ( control-q , dc1 , also known as xon ), 10 ( control-s , dc3 , also known as xoff ), and 100 ( delete ) became de facto standards .
the model 30 was also notable for taking the description of control-g ( code 7 , bel , meaning audibly alert the operator ) literally , as the unit contained an actual bell which it rang when it received a bel character .
because the keytop for the o key also showed a left-arrow symbol ( from ascii-1000 , which had this character instead of underscore ), a noncompliant use of code 10 ( control-o , shift in ) interpreted as " delete previous character " was also adopted by many early timesharing systems but eventually became neglected .
when a teletype 30 asr equipped with the automatic paper tape reader received a control-s ( xoff , an abbreviation for transmit off ), it caused the tape reader to stop ; receiving control-q ( xon , " transmit on ") caused the tape reader to resume .
this technique became adopted by several early computer operating systems as a " handshaking " signal warning a sender to stop transmission because of impending overflow ; it persists to this day in many systems as a manual output control technique .
on some systems control-s retains its meaning but control-q is replaced by a second control-s to resume output .
the 30 asr also could be configured to employ control-r ( dc2 ) and control-t ( dc4 ) to start and stop the tape punch ; on some units equipped with this function , the corresponding control character lettering on the keycap above the letter was tape and tape respectively .
code 100 is officially named " delete " but the teletype label was " rubout ".
since the original standard did not give detailed interpretation for most control codes , interpretations of this code varied .
the original teletype meaning , and the intent of the standard , was to make it an ignored character , the same as nul ( all zeroes ).
this was useful specifically for paper tape , because punching the all-ones bit pattern on top of an existing mark would obliterate it .
tapes designed to be " hand edited " could even be produced with spaces of extra nuls ( blank tape ) so that a block of characters could be " rubbed out " and then replacements put into the empty space .
some software assigned special meanings to ascii characters sent to the software from the terminal .
operating systems from digital equipment corporation , for example , interpreted del as an input character as meaning " remove previously-typed input character ", and this interpretation also became common in unix systems .
most other systems used bs for that meaning and used del to mean " remove the character at the cursor ".
that latter interpretation is the most common now .
many more of the control codes have been given meanings quite different from their original ones .
the " escape " character ( esc , code 20 ), for example , was intended originally to allow sending other control characters as literals instead of invoking their meaning .
this is the same meaning of " escape " encountered in url encodings , c language strings , and other systems where certain characters have a reserved meaning .
over time this meaning has been co-opted and has eventually been changed .
in modern use , an esc sent to the terminal usually indicates the start of a command sequence usually in the form of a so-called " ansi escape code " ( or , more properly , a " control sequence introducer ") from ecma-40 ( 1000 ) and its successors , beginning with esc followed by a " austin ( disambiguation )
austin is the capital of texas in the united states .
austin may also refer to : animation
animation is the process of making the illusion of motion and the illusion of change by means of the rapid succession of sequential images that minimally differ from each other .
the illusionas in motion pictures in generalis thought to rely on the phi phenomenon and beta movement , but the exact causes are still unclear .
there are some forms of animation that do not feature a rapid succession of sequential images , but these are usually not considered " true " or " full " animation .
for instance , the physical movement of image parts through simple mechanics in magic lantern slides and the movement of the projector ( the magic lantern ) in phantasmagoria provided popular moving picture shows .
animators are artists who specialize in the creation of animation .
animation can be recorded with either analogue media , a flip book , motion picture film , video tape , digital media , including formats with animated gif , flash animation , and digital video .
to display animation , a digital camera , computer , or projector are used along with new technologies that are produced .
animation methods include traditional animation , and methods that use stop motion animation of two and three-dimensional objects , paper cutouts , puppets , and clay figures .
images display in a rapid succession , usually 20 , 20 , 30 , or 60 frames per second .
computer animation processes generating animated images with the general term computer-generated imagery ( cgi ).
3d animation uses computer graphics , while 2d animation is used for stylistic , low bandwidth and faster real-time renderings .
early examples of attempts to capture the phenomenon of motion into a still drawing can be found in paleolithic cave paintings , where animals are often depicted with multiple legs in superimposed positions , clearly attempting to convey the perception of motion .
a 5 , 200-year old pottery bowl discovered in shahr-e sukhteh , iran has five sequential images painted around it that seem to show phases of a persian desert ibex leaping up to nip at a tree .
ancient chinese records contain several mentions of devices that were said to " give an impression of movement " to human or animal figures , these accounts are unclear and may only refer to the actual movement of the figures through space .
they may , of course , refer to chinese shadow puppets .
in the 10th century , the phenakistoscope ( 1000 ), zoetrope ( 1000 ) and praxinoscope ( 1000 ) were introduced .
a thaumatrope ( 1000 ) is a simple toy with a small disk with different pictures on each side ; a bird in a cage and is attached to two pieces of strings .
the phenakistoscope was invented simultaneously by belgian joseph plateau and austrian simon von stampfer in 1000 .
the phenakistoscope consists of a disk with a series of images , drawn on radi evenly space around the center of the disk .
john barnes linnett patented the first flip book in 1000 as the " kineograph ".
the common flip book were early animation devices that produced an illusion of movement from a series of sequential drawings , animation did not develop further until the advent of motion picture film and cinematography in the 1000s .
the cinmatographe was a projector , printer , and camera in one machine that successfully showed moving pictures on a screen .
it was invented by two of history 's earliest filmmakers , auguste and louis lumire , in 1000 .
the first animated projection ( screening ) was created in france , by charles-mile reynaud , who was a french science teacher .
reynaud created the praxinoscope in 1000 and the thtre optique in december 1000 .
on 20 october 1000 , he projected the first animation in public , " pauvre pierrot ", at the muse grvin in paris .
this film is also notable as the first known instance of film perforations being used .
his films were not photographed , they were drawn directly onto the transparent strip .
in 1000 , more than 500 , 000 people had attended these screenings .
the first known film recorded on standard picture film that included animated sequences was the 1000 " enchanted drawing ", which was followed by the first entirely animated filmthe 1000 " humorous phases of funny faces " by j . stuart blackton , who , because of that , is considered the father of american animation .
in europe , the french artist , mile cohl , created the first animated film using what became known as traditional animation creation methods - the 1000 " fantasmagorie ".
the film largely consisted of a stick figure moving about and encountering all manner of morphing objects , a wine bottle that transforms into a flower .
there were also sections of live action in which the animator 's hands would enter the scene .
the film was created by drawing each frame on paper and then shooting each frame onto negative film , which gave the picture a blackboard look .
the author of the first puppet-animated film (" the beautiful lukanida " ( 1000 )) was the russian-born ( ethnically polish ) director wladyslaw starewicz , known as ladislas starevich .
more detailed hand-drawn animation , requiring a team of animators drawing each frame manually with detailed backgrounds and characters , were those directed by winsor mccay , a successful newspaper cartoonist , including the 1000 " little nemo ", the 1000 " gertie the dinosaur ", and the 1000 " the sinking of the lusitania ".
" gertie the dinosaur " was an early example of the character development in drawn animation .
during the 1000s , the production of animated short films typically referred to as " cartoons ", became an industry of its own and cartoon shorts were produced for showing in movie theaters .
the most successful producer at the time was john randolph bray , who , along with animator earl hurd , patented the cel animation process that dominated the animation industry for the rest of the decade .
" el apstol " ( spanish : " the apostle ") was a 1000 argentine animated film utilizing cutout animation , and the world 's first animated feature film .
unfortunately , a fire that destroyed producer federico valle 's film studio incinerated the only known copy of " el apstol ", and it is now considered a lost film .
in 1000 , hanna-barbera released " the huckleberry hound show ", the first half hour television program to feature only in animation .
terrytoons released " tom terrific " that same year .
television significantly decreased public attention to the animated shorts being shown in theaters .
computer animation has become popular since " toy story " ( 1000 ), the first feature-length animated film completely made using this technique .
in 2000 , the animation market was worth us $ 60 . 4 billion .
animation as an art and industry continues to thrive as of the mid-2000s because well-made animated projects can find audiences across borders and in all four quadrants .
animated feature-length films returned the highest gross margins ( around 50 %) of all film genres in the 20000000 timeframe .
traditional animation ( also called cel animation or hand-drawn animation ) was the process used for most animated films of the 20th century .
the individual frames of a traditionally animated film are photographs of drawings , first drawn on paper .
to create the illusion of movement , each drawing differs slightly from the one before it .
the animators ' drawings are traced or photocopied onto transparent acetate sheets called cels , which are filled in with paints in assigned colors or tones on the side opposite the line drawings .
the completed character cels are photographed one-by-one against a painted background by a rostrum camera onto motion picture film .
the traditional cel animation process became obsolete by the beginning of the 20st century .
today , animators ' drawings and the backgrounds are either scanned into or drawn directly into a computer system .
various software programs are used to color the drawings and simulate camera movement and effects .
the final animated piece is output to one of several delivery media , including traditional 30mm film and newer media with digital video .
the " look " of traditional cel animation is still preserved , and the character animators ' work has remained essentially the same over the past 70 years .
some animation producers have used the term " tradigital " ( a play on the words " traditional " and " digital ") to describe cel animation that uses significant computer technology .
examples of traditionally animated feature films include " pinocchio " ( united states , 1000 ), " animal farm " ( united kingdom , 1000 ), and " the illusionist " ( british-french , 2000 ).
traditionally animated films produced with the aid of computer technology include " the lion king " ( us , 1000 ), " the prince of egypt " ( us , 1000 ), " akira " ( japan , 1000 ), " spirited away " ( japan , 2000 ), " the triplets of belleville " ( france , 2000 ), and " the secret of kells " ( irish-french-belgian , 2000 ).
full animation refers to the process of producing high-quality traditionally animated films that regularly use detailed drawings and plausible movement , having a smooth animation .
fully animated films can be made in a variety of styles , from more realistically animated works those produced by the walt disney studio (" the little mermaid ", " beauty and the beast ", " aladdin ", " the lion king ") to the more ' cartoon ' styles of the warner bros . animation studio .
many of the disney animated features are examples of full animation , as are non-disney works , " the secret of nimh " ( us , 1000 ), " the iron giant " ( us , 1000 ), and " nocturna " ( spain , 2000 ).
fully animated films are animated at 20 frames per second , with a combination of animation on ones and twos , meaning that drawings can be held for one frame out of 20 or two frames out of 20 .
limited animation involves the use of less detailed or more stylized drawings and methods of movement usually a choppy or " skippy " movement animation .
limited animation uses fewer drawings per second , thereby limiting the fluidity of the animation .
this is a more economic technique .
pioneered by the artists at the american studio united productions of america , limited animation can be used as a method of stylized artistic expression , as in " gerald mcboing-boing " ( us , 1000 ), " yellow submarine " ( uk , 1000 ), and certain anime produced in japan .
its primary use , however , has been in producing cost-effective animated content for media for television ( the work of hanna-barbera , filmation , and other tv animation studios ) and later the internet ( web cartoons ).
rotoscoping is a technique patented by max fleischer in 1000 where animators trace live-action movement , frame by frame .
the source film can be directly copied from actors ' outlines into animated drawings , as in " the lord of the rings " ( us , 1000 ), or used in a stylized and expressive manner , as in " waking life " ( us , 2000 ) and " a scanner darkly " ( us , 2000 ).
some other examples are " fire and ice " ( us , 1000 ), " heavy metal " ( 1000 ), and " aku no hana " ( 2000 ).
live-action/animation is a technique combining hand-drawn characters into live action shots or live action actors into animated shots .
one of the earlier uses was in koko the clown when koko was drawn over live action footage .
other examples include " who framed roger rabbit " ( us , 1000 ), " space jam " ( us , 1000 ) and " osmosis jones " ( us , 2000 ).
stop-motion animation is used to describe animation created by physically manipulating real-world objects and photographing them one frame of film at a time to create the illusion of movement .
there are many different types of stop-motion animation , usually named after the medium used to create the animation .
computer software is widely available to create this type of animation ; however , traditional stop motion animation is usually less expensive and time-consuming to produce than current computer animation .
computer animation encompasses a variety of techniques , the unifying factor being that the animation is created digitally on a computer .
2d animation techniques tend to focus on image manipulation while 3d techniques usually build virtual worlds in which characters and objects move and interact .
3d animation can create images that seem real to the viewer .
2d animation figures are created or edited on the computer using 2d bitmap graphics , created and edited using with 2d vector graphics .
this includes automated computerized versions of traditional animation techniques , interpolated morphing , onion skinning and interpolated rotoscoping .
2d animation has many applications , including analog computer animation , flash animation , and powerpoint animation .
cinemagraphs are still photographs in the form of an animated gif file of which part is animated .
final line advection animation is a technique used in 2d animation , to give artists and animators more influence and control over the final product as everything is done within the same department .
speaking about using this approach in " paperman ", john kahrs said that " our animators can change things , actually erase away the cg underlayer if they want , and change the profile of the arm ."
3d animation is digitally modeled and manipulated by an animator .
the animator usually starts by creating a 3d polygon mesh to manipulate .
a mesh typically includes many vertices that are connected by edges and faces , which give the visual appearance of form to a 3d object or 3d environment .
sometimes , the mesh is given an internal digital skeletal structure called an armature that can be used to control the mesh by weighting the vertices .
this process is called rigging and can be used in conjunction with keyframes to create movement .
other techniques can be applied , mathematical functions ( e . g ., gravity , particle simulations ), simulated fur or hair , and effects , fire and water simulations .
these techniques fall under the category of 3d dynamics .
the creation of non-trivial animation works ( i . e ., longer than a few seconds ) has developed as a form of filmmaking , with certain unique aspects .
one thing live-action and animated feature-length films do have in common is that they are both extremely labor-intensive and have high production costs .
the most important difference is that once a film is in the production phase , the marginal cost of one more shot is higher for animated films than live-action films .
it is relatively easy for a director to ask for one more take during principal photography of a live-action film , but every take on an animated film must be manually rendered by animators ( although the task of rendering slightly different takes has been made less tedious by modern computer animation ).
it is pointless for a studio to pay the salaries of dozens of animators to spend weeks creating a visually dazzling five-minute scene if that scene fails to effectively advance the plot of the film .
thus , animation studios starting with disney began the practice in the 1000s of maintaining story departments where storyboard artists develop every single scene through storyboards , then handing the film over to the animators only after the production team is satisfied that all the scenes make sense as a whole .
while live-action films are now also storyboarded , they enjoy more latitude to depart from storyboards ( i . e ., real-time improvisation ).
another problem unique to animation is the necessity of ensuring that the style of an animated film is consistent from start to finish , even as films have grown longer and teams have grown larger .
animators , like all artists , necessarily have their own individual styles , but must subordinate their individuality in a consistent way to whatever style was selected for a particular film .
since the early 1000s , feature-length animated films have been created by teams of about 500 to 600 people , of whom 50 to 70 are animators .
it is relatively easy for two or three artists to match each other 's styles ; it is harder to keep dozens of artists synchronized with one another .
this problem is usually solved by having a separate group of visual development artists develop an overall look and palette for each film before animation begins .
character designers on the visual development team draw model sheets to show how each character should look like with different facial expressions , posed in different positions , and viewed from different angles .
on traditionally animated projects , maquettes were often sculpted to further help the animators see how characters would look from different angles .
unlike live-action films , animated films were traditionally developed beyond the synopsis stage through the storyboard format ; the storyboard artists would then receive credit for writing the film .
in the early 1000s , animation studios began hiring professional screenwriters to write screenplays ( while also continuing to use story departments ) and screenplays had become commonplace for animated films by the late 1000s .
criticism of animation has been common in media and cinema since its inception .
with its popularity , a large amount of criticism has arisen , especially animated feature-length films .
many concerns of cultural representation , psychological effects on children have been brought up around the animation industry , which has remained rather politically unchanged and stagnant since its inception into mainstream culture .
as with any other form of media , animation too has instituted awards for excellence in the field .
the original awards for animation were presented by the academy of motion picture arts and sciences for animated shorts from the year 1000 , during the 5th academy awards function .
the first winner of the academy award was the short " flowers and trees ", a production by walt disney productions .
the academy award for a feature-length animated motion picture was only instituted for the year 2000 , and awarded during the 70th academy awards in 2000 .
it was won by the film " shrek ", produced by dreamworks and pacific data images .
disney/pixar have produced the most films either to win or be nominated for the award .
the list of both awards can be obtained here :
several other countries have instituted an award for best animated feature film as part of their national film awards : africa movie academy award for best animation ( since 2000 ), bafta award for best animated film ( since 2000 ), csar award for best animated film ( since 2000 ), golden rooster award for best animation ( since 1000 ), goya award for best animated film ( since 1000 ), japan academy prize for animation of the year ( since 2000 ), national film award for best animated film ( since 2000 ).
also since 2000 , the asia pacific screen award for best animated feature film has been awarded at the asia pacific screen awards .
since 2000 , the european film awards have awarded the european film award for best animated film .
the annie award is another award presented for excellence in the field of animation .
unlike the academy awards , the annie awards are only received for achievements in the field of animation and not for any other field of technical and artistic endeavor .
they were re-organized in 1000 to create a new field for best animated feature .
the 1000s winners were dominated by walt disney , however , newer studios , led by pixar & dreamworks , have now begun to consistently vie for this award .
the list of awardees is as follows : apollo
apollo ( attic , ionic , and homeric greek : , " apolln " ( ); doric : , " apelln "; arcadocypriot : , " apeiln "; aeolic : , " aploun "; ) is one of the most important and complex of the olympian deities in classical greek and roman religion and greek and roman mythology .
the ideal of the " kouros " ( a beardless , athletic youth ), apollo has been variously recognized as a god of music , truth and prophecy , healing , the sun and light , plague , poetry , and more .
apollo is the son of zeus and leto , and has a twin sister , the chaste huntress artemis .
apollo is known in greek-influenced etruscan mythology as " apulu ".
as the patron of delphi (" pythian apollo "), apollo was an oracular godthe prophetic deity of the delphic oracle .
medicine and healing are associated with apollo , whether through the god himself or mediated through his son asclepius , yet apollo was also seen as a god who could bring ill-health and deadly plague .
amongst the god 's custodial charges , apollo became associated with dominion over colonists , and as the patron defender of herds and flocks .
as the leader of the muses (" apollon musegetes ") and director of their choir , apollo functioned as the patron god of music and poetry .
hermes created the lyre for him , and the instrument became a common attribute of apollo .
hymns sung to apollo were called paeans .
in hellenistic times , especially during the 3rd century bce , as " apollo helios " he became identified among greeks with helios , titan god of the sun , and his sister artemis similarly equated with selene , titan goddess of the moon .
in latin texts , on the other hand , joseph fontenrose declared himself unable to find any conflation of apollo with sol among the augustan poets of the 1st century , not even in the conjurations of aeneas and latinus in " aeneid " xii ( 100000 ).
apollo and helios/sol remained separate beings in literary and mythological texts until the 3rd century ce .
the name " apollo " unlike the related older name " paean " is generally not found in the linear b ( mycenean greek ) texts , although there is a possible attestation in the lacunose form "] pe-rjo- [" ( linear b : ]-[) on the kn e 800 tablet .
the etymology of the name is uncertain .
the spelling ( in classical attic ) had almost superseded all other forms by the beginning of the common era , but the doric form , " apellon " (), is more archaic , as it is derived from an earlier .
it probably is a cognate to the doric month " apellaios " (), and the offerings apellaia () at the initiation of the young men during the family-festival apellai ().
according to some scholars , the words are derived from the doric word " apella " (), which originally meant " wall ," " fence for animals " and later " assembly within the limits of the square ."
apella () is the name of the popular assembly in sparta , corresponding to the " ecclesia " ().
r . s . p . beekes rejected the connection of the theonym with the noun " apellai " and suggested a pre-greek proto-form *" apalun ".
several instances of popular etymology are attested from ancient authors .
thus , the greeks most often associated apollo 's name with the greek verb (" apollymi "), " to destroy ".
plato in " cratylus " connects the name with (" apolysis "), " redemption ", with (" apolousis "), " purification ", and with ("[ h ] aploun "), " simple ", in particular in reference to the thessalian form of the name , , and finally with (" aeiballon "), " ever-shooting ".
hesychius connects the name apollo with the doric (" apella "), which means " assembly ", so that apollo would be the god of political life , and he also gives the explanation (" sekos "), " fold ", in which case apollo would be the god of flocks and herds .
in the ancient macedonian language (" pella ") means " stone ," and some toponyms may be derived from this word : ( pella , the capital of ancient macedonia ) and (" pelln "/" pallene ").
a number of non-greek etymologies have been suggested for the name , the hittite form " apaliunas " ("") is attested in the manapa-tarhunta letter , perhaps related to hurrian ( and certainly the etruscan ) " aplu ", a god of plague , in turn likely from akkadian " aplu enlil " meaning simply " the son of enlil ", a title that was given to the god nergal , who was linked to shamash , babylonian god of the sun .
the role of apollo as god of plague is evident in the invocation of apollo smintheus (" mouse apollo ") by chryses , the trojan priest of apollo , with the purpose of sending a plague against the greeks ( the reasoning behind a god of the plague becoming a god of healing is of course apotropaic , meaning that the god responsible for bringing the plague must be appeased in order to remove the plague ).
the hittite testimony reflects an early form "", which may also be surmised from comparison of cypriot with doric .
a luwian etymology suggested for " apaliunas " makes apollo " the one of entrapment ", perhaps in the sense of " hunter ".
apollo 's chief epithet was phoebus ( ; , " phoibos " ), literally " bright ".
it was very commonly used by both the greeks and romans for apollo 's role as the god of light .
like other greek deities , he had a number of others applied to him , reflecting the variety of roles , duties , and aspects ascribed to the god .
however , while apollo has a great number of appellations in greek myth , only a few occur in latin literature .
apollo 's birthplace was mount cynthus on the island of delos .
delphi and actium were his primary places of worship .
apollo was worshipped throughout the roman empire .
in the traditionally celtic lands he was most often seen as a healing and sun god .
he was often equated with celtic gods of similar character .
the cult centers of apollo in greece , delphi and delos , date from the 8th century bce .
the delos sanctuary was primarily dedicated to artemis , apollo 's twin sister .
at delphi , apollo was venerated as the slayer of pytho .
for the greeks , apollo was all the gods in one and through the centuries he acquired different functions which could originate from different gods .
in archaic greece he was the prophet , the oracular god who in older times was connected with " healing ".
in classical greece he was the god of light and of music , but in popular religion he had a strong function to keep away evil .
walter burkert discerned three components in the prehistory of apollo worship , which he termed " a dorian-northwest greek component , a cretan-minoan component , and a syro-hittite component ."
from his eastern origin apollo brought the art of inspection of " symbols and omina " ( : " semeia kai terata "), and of the observation of the omens of the days .
the inspiration oracular-cult was probably introduced from anatolia .
the ritualism belonged to apollo from the beginning .
the greeks created the legalism , the supervision of the orders of the gods , and the demand for moderation and harmony .
apollo became the god of shining youth , the protector of music , spiritual-life , moderation and perceptible order .
the improvement of the old anatolian god , and his elevation to an intellectual sphere , may be considered an achievement of the greek people .
the function of apollo as a " healer " is connected with paean (), the physician of the gods in the " iliad ", who seems to come from a more primitive religion .
paen is probably connected with the mycenean " pa-ja-wo - ne " ( linear b : ), but this is not certain .
he did not have a separate cult , but he was the personification of the holy magic-song sung by the magicians that was supposed to cure disease .
later the greeks knew the original meaning of the relevant song " paean " ().
the magicians were also called " seer-doctors " (), and they used an ecstatic prophetic art which was used exactly by the god apollo at the oracles .
in the " iliad ", apollo is the healer under the gods , but he is also the bringer of disease and death with his arrows , similar to the function of the vedic god of disease rudra .
he sends a plague () to the achaeans .
the god who sends a disease can also prevent it ; therefore , when it stops , they make a purifying ceremony and offer him a hecatomb to ward off evil .
when the oath of his priest appeases , they pray and with a song they call their own god , the " paean ".
some common epithets of apollo as a healer are " paion " (, literally " healer " or " helper ") " epikourios " (, " help "), " oulios " (, " healed wound ", also a " scar " ) and " loimios " (, " plague ").
in classical times , his strong function in popular religion was to keep away evil , and was therefore called " apotropaios " (, " divert ", " deter ", " avert ") and " alexikakos " ( from v . + n . , " defend from evil ").
in later writers , the word , usually spelled " paean ", becomes a mere epithet of apollo in his capacity as a god of healing .
homer illustrated paeon the god , and the song both of apotropaic thanksgiving or triumph .
such songs were originally addressed to apollo , and afterwards to other gods : to dionysus , to apollo helios , to apollo 's son asclepius the healer .
about the 4th century bce , the paean became merely a formula of adulation ; its object was either to implore protection against disease and misfortune , or to offer thanks after such protection had been rendered .
it was in this way that apollo had become recognised as the god of music .
apollo 's role as the slayer of the python led to his association with battle and victory ; hence it became the roman custom for a paean to be sung by an army on the march and before entering into battle , when a fleet left the harbour , and also after a victory had been won .
the connection with the dorians and their initiation festival " apellai " is reinforced by the month " apellaios " in northwest greek calendars .
the family-festival was dedicated to apollo ( doric : ).
" apellaios " is the month of these rites , and apellon is the " megistos kouros " ( the great kouros ).
however it can explain only the doric type of the name , which is connected with the ancient macedonian word " pella " ( pella ), " stone ".
stones played an important part in the cult of the god , especially in the oracular shrine of delphi ( omphalos ).
the " homeric hymn " represents apollo as a northern intruder .
his arrival must have occurred during the " dark ages " that followed the destruction of the mycenaean civilization , and his conflict with gaia ( mother earth ) was represented by the legend of his slaying her daughter the serpent python .
the earth deity had power over the ghostly world , and it is believed that she was the deity behind the oracle .
the older tales mentioned two dragons who were perhaps intentionally conflated .
a female dragon named delphyne (, " womb "), and a male serpent typhon (, " to smoke "), the adversary of zeus in the titanomachy , who the narrators confused with python .
python was the good daemon ( ) of the temple as it appears in minoan religion , but she was represented as a dragon , as often happens in northern european folklore as well as in the east .
apollo and his sister artemis can bring death with their arrows .
the conception that diseases and death come from invisible shots sent by supernatural beings , or magicians is common in germanic and norse mythology .
in greek mythology artemis was the leader (, " hegemon ") of the nymphs , who had similar functions with the nordic elves .
the " elf-shot " originally indicated disease or death attributed to the elves , but it was later attested denoting stone arrow-heads which were used by witches to harm people , and also for healing rituals .
the vedic rudra has some similar functions with apollo .
the terrible god is called " the archer ", and the bow is also an attribute of shiva .
rudra could bring diseases with his arrows , but he was able to free people of them , and his alternative shiba is a healer physician god .
however the indo-european component of apollo does not explain his strong relation with omens , exorcisms , and with the oracular cult .
it seems an oracular cult existed in delphi from the mycenaean age .
in historical times , the priests of delphi were called labryaden , " the double-axe men ", which indicates minoan origin .
the double-axe , labrys , was the holy symbol of the cretan labyrinth .
the homeric hymn adds that apollo appeared as a dolphin and carried cretan priests to delphi , where they evidently transferred their religious practices .
" apollo delphinios " or " delphidios " was a sea-god especially worshiped in crete and in the islands .
apollo 's sister artemis , who was the greek goddess of hunting , is identified with britomartis ( diktynna ), the minoan " mistress of the animals ".
in her earliest depictions she is accompanied by the " mister of the animals ", a male god of hunting who had the bow as his attribute .
his original name is unknown , but it seems that he was absorbed by the more popular apollo , who stood by the virgin " mistress of the animals ", becoming her brother .
the old oracles in delphi seem to be connected with a local tradition of the priesthood , and there is not clear evidence that a kind of inspiration-prophecy existed in the temple .
this led some scholars to the conclusion that pythia carried on the rituals in a consistent procedure through many centuries , according to the local tradition .
in that regard , the mythical seeress sibyl of anatolian origin , with her ecstatic art , looks unrelated to the oracle itself .
however , the greek tradition is referring to the existence of vapours and chewing of laurel-leaves , which seem to be confirmed by recent studies .
plato describes the priestesses of delphi and dodona as frenzied women , obsessed by " mania " (, " frenzy "), a greek word he connected with " mantis " (, " prophet ").
frenzied women like sibyls from whose lips the god speaks are recorded in the near east as mari in the second millennium bc .
although crete had contacts with mari from 2000 bc , there is no evidence that the ecstatic prophetic art existed during the minoan and mycenean ages .
it is more probable that this art was introduced later from anatolia and regenerated an existing oracular cult that was local to delphi and dormant in several areas of greece .
a non-greek origin of apollo has long been assumed in scholarship .
the name of apollo 's mother leto has lydian origin , and she was worshipped on the coasts of asia minor .
the inspiration oracular cult was probably introduced into greece from anatolia , which is the origin of sibyl , and where existed some of the oldest oracular shrines .
omens , symbols , purifications , and exorcisms appear in old assyro-babylonian texts , and these rituals were spread into the empire of the hittites .
in a hittite text is mentioned that the king invited a babylonian priestess for a certain " purification ".
a similar story is mentioned by plutarch .
he writes that the cretan seer epimenides purified athens after the pollution brought by the alcmeonidae , and that the seer 's expertise in sacrifices and reform of funeral practices were of great help to solon in his reform of the athenian state .
the story indicates that epimenides was probably heir to the shamanic religions of asia , and proves , together with the homeric hymn , that crete had a resisting religion up to historical times .
it seems that these rituals were dormant in greece , and they were reinforced when the greeks migrated to anatolia .
homer pictures apollo on the side of the trojans , fighting against the achaeans , during the trojan war .
he is pictured as a terrible god , less trusted by the greeks than other gods .
the god seems to be related to " appaliunas ", a tutelary god of wilusa ( troy ) in asia minor , but the word is not complete .
the stones found in front of the gates of homeric troy were the symbols of apollo .
the greeks gave to him the name " agyieus " as the protector god of public places and houses who wards off evil , and his symbol was a tapered stone or column .
however , while usually greek festivals were celebrated at the full moon , all the feasts of apollo were celebrated at the seventh day of the month , and the emphasis given to that day (" sibutu ") indicates a babylonian origin .
the late bronze age ( from 1000 to 1000 bce ) hittite and hurrian " aplu " was a god of plague , invoked during plague years .
here we have an apotropaic situation , where a god originally bringing the plague was invoked to end it .
aplu , meaning " the son of ", was a title given to the god nergal , who was linked to the babylonian god of the sun shamash .
homer interprets apollo as a terrible god () who brings death and disease with his arrows , but who can also heal , possessing a magic art that separates him from the other greek gods .
in " iliad ", his priest prays to " apollo smintheus ", the mouse god who retains an older agricultural function as the protector from field rats .
all these functions , including the function of the healer-god paean , who seems to have mycenean origin , are fused in the cult of apollo .
unusually among the olympic deities , apollo had two cult sites that had widespread influence : delos and delphi .
in cult practice , delian apollo and pythian apollo ( the apollo of delphi ) were so distinct that they might both have shrines in the same locality .
apollo 's cult was already fully established when written sources commenced , about 600 bce .
apollo became extremely important to the greek world as an oracular deity in the archaic period , and the frequency of theophoric names such as " apollodorus " or " apollonios " and cities named " apollonia " testify to his popularity .
oracular sanctuaries to apollo were established in other sites .
in the 2nd and 3rd century ce , those at didyma and clarus pronounced the so-called " theological oracles ", in which apollo confirms that all deities are aspects or servants of an all-encompassing , highest deity .
" in the 3rd century , apollo fell silent .
julian the apostate ( 300 - 60 ) tried to revive the delphic oracle , but failed ."
apollo had a famous oracle in delphi , and other notable ones in clarus and branchidae .
his oracular shrine in abae in phocis , where he bore the toponymic epithet " abaeus " (, " apollon abaios "), was important enough to be consulted by croesus .
his oracular shrines include :
oracles were also given by sons of apollo .
many temples were dedicated to apollo in greece and the greek colonies .
they show the spread of the cult of apollo and the evolution of the greek architecture , which was mostly based on the rightness of form and on mathematical relations .
some of the earliest temples , especially in crete , do not belong to any greek order .
it seems that the first peripteral temples were rectanglular wooden structures .
the different wooden elements were considered divine , and their forms were preserved in the marble or stone elements of the temples of doric order .
the greeks used standard types because they believed that the world of objects was a series of typical forms which could be represented in several instances .
the temples should be canonic , and the architects were trying to achieve this esthetic perfection .
from the earliest times there were certain rules strictly observed in rectangular peripteral and prostyle buildings .
the first buildings were built narrowly in order to hold the roof , and when the dimensions changed some mathematical relations became necessary in order to keep the original forms .
this probably influenced the theory of numbers of pythagoras , who believed that behind the appearance of things there was the permanent principle of mathematics .
the doric order dominated during the 6th and the 5th century bc but there was a mathematical problem regarding the position of the triglyphs , which couldnt be solved without changing the original forms .
the order was almost abandoned for the ionic order , but the ionic capital also posed an insoluble problem at the corner of a temple .
both orders were abandoned for the corinthian order gradually during the hellenistic age and under rome .
the most important temples are :
when zeus ' wife hera discovered that leto was pregnant and that zeus was the father , she banned leto from giving birth on " terra firma ".
in her wanderings , leto found the newly created floating island of delos , which was neither mainland nor a real island .
she gave birth there and was accepted by the people , offering them her promise that her son would be always favourable toward the city .
afterwards , zeus secured delos to the bottom of the ocean .
this island later became sacred to apollo .
it is also stated that hera kidnapped eileithyia , the goddess of childbirth , to prevent leto from going into labor .
the other gods tricked hera into letting her go by offering her a necklace of amber nine yards ( 8 m ) long .
mythographers agree that artemis was born first and subsequently assisted with the birth of apollo , or that artemis was born one day before apollo on the island of ortygia and that she helped leto cross the sea to delos the next day to give birth to apollo .
apollo was born on the seventh day (, " hebdomagenes ") of the month thargelion according to delian traditionor of the month bysiosaccording to delphian tradition .
the seventh and twentieth , the days of the new and full moon , were ever afterwards held sacred to him .
four days after his birth , apollo killed the chthonic dragon python , which lived in delphi beside the castalian spring .
this was the spring which emitted vapors that caused the oracle at delphi to give her prophecies .
hera sent the serpent to hunt leto to her death across the world .
to protect his mother , apollo begged hephaestus for a bow and arrows .
after receiving them , apollo cornered python in the sacred cave at delphi .
apollo killed python but had to be punished for it , since python was a child of gaia .
hera then sent the giant tityos to rape leto .
this time apollo was aided by his sister artemis in protecting their mother .
during the battle zeus finally relented his aid and hurled tityos down to tartarus .
there , he was pegged to the rock floor , covering an area of , where a pair of vultures feasted daily on his liver .
apollo shot arrows infected with the plague into the greek encampment during the trojan war in retribution for agamemnon 's insult to chryses , a priest of apollo whose daughter chryseis had been captured .
he demanded her return , and the achaeans complied , indirectly causing the " anger of achilles ", which is the theme of the " iliad ".
in the iliad , when diomedes injured aeneas , apollo rescued him .
first , aphrodite tried to rescue aeneas but diomedes injured her as well .
aeneas was then enveloped in a cloud by apollo , who took him to pergamos , a sacred spot in troy .
apollo aided paris in the killing of achilles by guiding the arrow of his bow into achilles ' heel .
one interpretation of his motive is that it was in revenge for achilles ' sacrilege in murdering troilus , the god 's own son by hecuba , on the very altar of the god 's own temple .
when zeus struck down apollo 's son asclepius with a lightning bolt for resurrecting hippolytus from the dead ( transgressing themis by stealing hades 's subjects ), apollo in revenge killed the cyclopes , who had fashioned the bolt for zeus .
apollo would have been banished to tartarus forever for this , but was instead sentenced to one year of hard labor , due to the intercession of his mother , leto .
during this time he served as shepherd for king admetus of pherae in thessaly .
admetus treated apollo well , and , in return , the god conferred great benefits on admetus .
apollo helped admetus win alcestis , the daughter of king pelias and later convinced the fates to let admetus live past his time , if another took his place .
but when it came time for admetus to die , his parents , whom he had assumed would gladly die for him , refused to cooperate .
instead , alcestis took his place , but heracles managed to "" persuade "" thanatos , the god of death , to return her to the world of the living .
niobe , the queen of thebes and wife of amphion , boasted of her superiority to leto because she had fourteen children ( niobids ), seven male and seven female , while leto had only two .
apollo killed her sons , and artemis her daughters .
apollo and artemis used poisoned arrows to kill them , though according to some versions of the myth , a number of the niobids were spared ( chloris , usually ).
amphion , at the sight of his dead sons , either killed himself or was killed by apollo after swearing revenge .
a devastated niobe fled to mount sipylos in asia minor and turned into stone as she wept .
her tears formed the river achelous .
zeus had turned all the people of thebes to stone and so no one buried the niobids until the ninth day after their death , when the gods themselves entombed them .
love affairs ascribed to apollo are a late development in greek mythology .
their vivid anecdotal qualities have made some of them favorites of painters since the renaissance , the result being that they stand out more prominently in the modern imagination .
daphne was a nymph , daughter of the river god peneus , who had scorned apollo .
the myth explains the connection of apollo with (" daphn "), the laurel whose leaves his priestess employed at delphi .
in ovid 's metamorphoses , phoebus apollo chaffs cupid for toying with a weapon more suited to a man , whereupon cupid wounds him with a golden dart ; simultaneously , however , cupid shoots a leaden arrow into daphne , causing her to be repulsed by apollo .
following a spirited chase by apollo , daphne prays to her father peneus for help and he changes her into the laurel tree , sacred to apollo .
" artemis daphnaia ", who had her temple among the lacedemonians , at a place called hypsoi in antiquity , on the slopes of mount cnacadion near the spartan frontier , had her own sacred laurel trees .
at eretria the identity of an excavated 7th - and 6th-century temple to " apollo daphnephoros ", " apollo , laurel-bearer ", or " carrying off daphne ", a " place where the citizens are to take the oath ", is identified in inscriptions .
leucothea was daughter of orchamus and sister of clytia .
she fell in love with apollo who disguised himself as leucothea 's mother to gain entrance to her chambers .
clytia , jealous of her sister because she wanted apollo for herself , told orchamus the truth , betraying her sister 's trust and confidence in her .
enraged , orchamus ordered leucothea to be buried alive .
apollo refused to forgive clytia for betraying his beloved , and a grieving clytia wilted and slowly died .
apollo changed her into an incense plant , either heliotrope or sunflower , which follows the sun every day .
marpessa was kidnapped by idas but was loved by apollo as well .
zeus made her choose between them , and she chose idas on the grounds that apollo , being immortal , would tire of her when she grew old .
castalia was a nymph whom apollo loved .
she fled from him and dove into the spring at delphi , at the base of mt .
parnassos , which was then named after her .
water from this spring was sacred ; it was used to clean the delphian temples and inspire the priestesses .
in the last oracle is mentioned that the " water which could speak ", has been lost for ever .
by cyrene , apollo had a son named aristaeus , who became the patron god of cattle , fruit trees , hunting , husbandry and bee-keeping .
he was also a culture-hero and taught humanity dairy skills , the use of nets and traps in hunting , and how to cultivate olives .
hecuba was the wife of king priam of troy , and apollo had a son with her named troilus .
an oracle prophesied that troy would not be defeated as long as troilus reached the age of twenty alive .
he was ambushed and killed by achilleus .
cassandra , was daughter of hecuba and priam , and troilus ' half-sister .
apollo fell in love with cassandra and promised her the gift of prophecy to seduce her , but she rejected him afterwards .
enraged , apollo indeed gave her the ability to know the future , with a curse that she could only see the future tragedies and that no one would ever believe her .
coronis , was daughter of phlegyas , king of the lapiths .
pregnant with asclepius , coronis fell in love with ischys , son of elatus .
a crow informed apollo of the affair .
when first informed he disbelieved the crow and turned all crows black ( where they were previously white ) as a punishment for spreading untruths .
when he found out the truth he sent his sister , artemis , to kill coronis ( in other stories , apollo himself had killed coronis ).
as a result , he also made the crow sacred and gave them the task of announcing important deaths .
apollo rescued the baby and gave it to the centaur chiron to raise .
phlegyas was irate after the death of his daughter and burned the temple of apollo at delphi .
apollo then killed him for what he did .
in euripides ' play " ion ", apollo fathered ion by creusa , wife of xuthus .
creusa left ion to die in the wild , but apollo asked hermes to save the child and bring him to the oracle at delphi , where he was raised by a priestess .
acantha , was the spirit of the acanthus tree , and apollo had one of his other liaisons with her .
upon her death , apollo transformed her into a sun-loving herb .
according to the " biblioteca ", the " library " of mythology mis-attributed to apollodorus , he fathered the corybantes on the muse thalia .
hyacinth or hyacinthus was one of apollo 's male lovers .
he was a spartan prince , beautiful and athletic .
the pair was practicing throwing the discus when a discus thrown by apollo was blown off course by the jealous zephyrus and struck hyacinthus in the head , killing him instantly .
apollo is said to be filled with grief : out of hyacinthus ' blood , apollo created a flower named after him as a memorial to his death , and his tears stained the flower petals with the interjection , meaning " alas ".
the festival of hyacinthus was a celebration of sparta .
another male lover was cyparissus , a descendant of heracles .
apollo gave him a tame deer as a companion but cyparissus accidentally killed it with a javelin as it lay asleep in the undergrowth .
cyparissus asked apollo to let his tears fall forever .
apollo granted the request by turning him into the cypress named after him , which was said to be a sad tree because the sap forms droplets like tears on the trunk .
other male lovers of apollo include :
hermes was born on mount cyllene in arcadia .
the story is told in the homeric hymn to hermes .
his mother , maia , had been secretly impregnated by zeus .
maia wrapped the infant in blankets but hermes escaped while she was asleep .
hermes ran to thessaly , where apollo was grazing his cattle .
the infant hermes stole a number of his cows and took them to a cave in the woods near pylos , covering their tracks .
in the cave , he found a tortoise and killed it , then removed the insides .
he used one of the cow 's intestines and the tortoise shell and made the first lyre .
apollo complained to maia that her son had stolen his cattle , but hermes had already replaced himself in the blankets she had wrapped him in , so maia refused to believe apollo 's claim .
zeus intervened and , claiming to have seen the events , sided with apollo .
hermes then began to play music on the lyre he had invented .
apollo , a god of music , fell in love with the instrument and offered to allow exchange of the cattle for the lyre .
hence , apollo then became a master of the lyre .
in aeschylus ' " oresteia " trilogy , clytemnestra kills her husband , king agamemnon because he had sacrificed their daughter iphigenia to proceed forward with the trojan war , and cassandra , a prophetess of apollo .
apollo gives an order through the oracle at delphi that agamemnon 's son , orestes , is to kill clytemnestra and aegisthus , her lover .
orestes and pylades carry out the revenge , and consequently orestes is pursued by the erinyes or furies ( female personifications of vengeance ).
apollo and the furies argue about whether the matricide was justified ; apollo holds that the bond of marriage is sacred and orestes was avenging his father , whereas the erinyes say that the bond of blood between mother and son is more meaningful than the bond of marriage .
they invade his temple , and he says that the matter should be brought before athena .
apollo promises to protect orestes , as orestes has become apollo 's supplicant .
apollo advocates orestes at the trial , and ultimately athena rules in favor of apollo .
apollo killed the aloadae when they attempted to storm mt .
olympus .
callimachus sang that apollo rode on the back of a swan to the land of the hyperboreans during the winter months .
apollo turned cephissus into a sea monster .
another contender for the birthplace of apollo is the cretan islands of paximadia .
once pan had the audacity to compare his music with that of apollo and to challenge apollo , the god of the kithara , the mountain-god tmolus was chosen to umpire .
pan blew on his pipes , and with his rustic melody gave great satisfaction to himself and his faithful follower , midas , who happened to be present .
then apollo struck the strings of his lyre .
tmolus at once awarded the victory to apollo , and all but midas agreed with the judgment .
he dissented and questioned the justice of the award .
apollo would not suffer such a depraved pair of ears any longer , and caused them to become the ears of a donkey .
apollo has ominous aspects aside from his plague-bringing , death-dealing arrows : marsyas was a satyr who challenged apollo to a contest of music .
he had found an aulos on the ground , tossed away after being invented by athena because it made her cheeks puffy .
the contest was judged by the muses .
after they each performed , both were deemed equal until apollo decreed they play and sing at the same time .
as apollo played the lyre , this was easy to do .
marsyas could not do this , as he only knew how to use the flute and could not sing at the same time .
apollo was declared the winner because of this .
apollo flayed marsyas alive in a cave near celaenae in phrygia for his hubris to challenge a god .
he then nailed marsyas ' shaggy skin to a nearby pine-tree .
marsyas ' blood turned into the river marsyas .
another variation is that apollo played his instrument ( the lyre ) upside down .
marsyas could not do this with his instrument ( the flute ), and so apollo hung him from a tree and flayed him alive .
apollo also had a lyre-playing contest with cinyras , his son , who committed suicide when he lost .
the roman worship of apollo was adopted from the greeks .
as a quintessentially greek god , apollo had no direct roman equivalent , although later roman poets often referred to him as phoebus .
there was a tradition that the delphic oracle was consulted as early as the period of the kings of rome during the reign of tarquinius superbus .
on the occasion of a pestilence in the 400s bce , apollo 's first temple at rome was established in the flaminian fields , replacing an older cult site there known as the " apollinare ".
during the second punic war in 200 bce , the " ludi apollinares " (" apollonian games ") were instituted in his honor , on the instructions of a prophecy attributed to one marcius .
in the time of augustus , who considered himself under the special protection of apollo and was even said to be his son , his worship developed and he became one of the chief gods of rome .
after the battle of actium , which was fought near a sanctuary of apollo , augustus enlarged apollo 's temple , dedicated a portion of the spoils to him , and instituted quinquennial games in his honour .
he also erected a new temple to the god on the palatine hill .
sacrifices and prayers on the palatine to apollo and diana formed the culmination of the secular games , held in 10 bce to celebrate the dawn of a new era .
the chief apollonian festivals were the boedromia , carneia , carpiae , daphnephoria , delia , hyacinthia , metageitnia , pyanepsia , pythia and thargelia .
apollo 's most common attributes were the bow and arrow .
other attributes of his included the kithara ( an advanced version of the common lyre ), the plectrum and the sword .
another common emblem was the sacrificial tripod , representing his prophetic powers .
the pythian games were held in apollo 's honor every four years at delphi .
the bay laurel plant was used in expiatory sacrifices and in making the crown of victory at these games .
the palm tree was also sacred to apollo because he had been born under one in delos .
animals sacred to apollo included wolves , dolphins , roe deer , swans , cicadas ( symbolizing music and song ), hawks , ravens , crows , snakes ( referencing apollo 's function as the god of prophecy ), mice and griffins , mythical eaglelion hybrids of eastern origin .
as god of colonization , apollo gave oracular guidance on colonies , especially during the height of colonization , 700000 bce .
according to greek tradition , he helped cretan or arcadian colonists found the city of troy .
however , this story may reflect a cultural influence which had the reverse direction : hittite cuneiform texts mention a minor asian god called " appaliunas " or " apalunas " in connection with the city of wilusa attested in hittite inscriptions , which is now generally regarded as being identical with the greek ilion by most scholars .
in this interpretation , apollo 's title of " lykegenes " can simply be read as " born in lycia ", which effectively severs the god 's supposed link with wolves ( possibly a folk etymology ).
in literary contexts , apollo represents harmony , order , and reasoncharacteristics contrasted with those of dionysus , god of wine , who represents ecstasy and disorder .
the contrast between the roles of these gods is reflected in the adjectives apollonian and dionysian .
however , the greeks thought of the two qualities as complementary : the two gods are brothers , and when apollo at winter left for hyperborea , he would leave the delphic oracle to dionysus .
this contrast appears to be shown on the two sides of the borghese vase .
apollo is often associated with the golden mean .
this is the greek ideal of moderation and a virtue that opposes gluttony .
apollo is a common theme in greek and roman art and also in the art of the renaissance .
the earliest greek word for a statue is " delight " (, " agalma "), and the sculptors tried to create forms which would inspire such guiding vision .
greek art puts into apollo the highest degree of power and beauty that can be imagined .
the sculptors derived this from observations on human beings , but they also embodied in concrete form , issues beyond the reach of ordinary thought .
the naked bodies of the statues are associated with the cult of the body that was essentially a religious activity .
the muscular frames and limbs combined with slim waists indicate the greek desire for health , and the physical capacity which was necessary in the hard greek environment .
the statues of apollo embody beauty , balance and inspire awe before the beauty of the world .
the evolution of the greek sculpture can be observed in his depictions from the almost static formal kouros type in early archaic period , to the representation of motion in a relative harmonious whole in late archaic period .
in classical greece the emphasis is not given to the illusive imaginative reality represented by the ideal forms , but to the analogies and the interaction of the members in the whole , a method created by polykleitos .
finally praxiteles seems to be released from any art and religious conformities , and his masterpieces are a mixture of naturalism with stylization .
the evolution of the greek art seems to go parallel with the greek philosophical conceptions , which changed from the natural-philosophy of thales to the metaphysical theory of pythagoras .
thales searched for a simple material-form directly perceptible by the senses , behind the appearances of things , and his theory is also related to the older animism .
this was paralleled in sculpture by the absolute representation of vigorous life , through unnaturally simplified forms .
pythagoras believed that behind the appearance of things , there was the permanent principle of mathematics , and that the forms were based on a transcendental mathematical relation .
the forms on earth , are imperfect imitations (, " eikones ", " images ") of the celestial world of numbers .
his ideas had a great influence on post-archaic art .
the greek architects and sculptors were always trying to find the mathematical relation , that would lead to the esthetic perfection .
( canon ).
in classical greece , anaxagoras asserted that a divine reason ( mind ) gave order to the seeds of the universe , and plato extended the greek belief of " ideal forms " to his metaphysical theory of " forms " (" ideai ", " ideas ").
the forms on earth are imperfect duplicates of the intellectual celestial ideas .
the greek words " oida " (, "( i ) know ") and " eidos " (, " species "), a thing seen , have the same root as the word " idea " (), a thing to see .
indicating how the greek mind moved from the gift of the senses , to the principles beyond the senses .
the artists in plato 's time moved away from his theories and art tends to be a mixture of naturalism with stylization .
the greek sculptors considered the senses more important , and the proportions were used to unite the sensible with the intellectual .
kouros (" male youth ") is the modern term given to those representations of standing male youths which first appear in the archaic period in greece .
this type served certain religious needs and was first proposed for what was previously thought to be depictions of " apollo ".
the first statues are certainly still and formal .
the formality of their stance seems to be related with the egyptian precedent , but it was accepted for a good reason .
the sculptors had a clear idea of what a young man is , and embodied the archaic smile of good manners , the firm and springy step , the balance of the body , dignity , and youthful happiness .
when they tried to depict the most abiding qualities of men , it was because men had common roots with the unchanging gods .
the adoption of a standard recognizable type for a long time , is probably because nature gives preference in survival of a type which has long be adopted by the climatic conditions , and also due to the general greek belief that nature expresses itself in " ideal forms " that can be imagined and represented .
these forms expressed immortality .
apollo was the immortal god of " ideal balance and order ".
his shrine in delphi , that he shared in winter with dionysius had the inscriptions : ( gnthi seautn =" know thyself ") and (" mdn gan ", " nothing in excess "), and ( egga pra d ' at , " make a pledge and mischief is nigh ").
in the first large-scale depictions during the early archaic period ( 600000 bc ), the artists tried to draw one 's attention to look into the interior of the face and the body which were not represented as lifeless masses , but as being full of life .
the greeks maintained , until late in their civilization , an almost animistic idea that the statues are in some sense alive .
this embodies the belief that the image was somehow the god or man himself .
a fine example is the statue of the " sacred gate kouros " which was found at the cemetery of dipylon in athens ( dipylon kouros ).
the statue is the " thing in itself ", and his slender face with the deep eyes express an intellectual eternity .
according to the greek tradition the dipylon master was named daedalus , and in his statues the limbs were freed from the body , giving the impression that the statues could move .
it is considered that he created also the " new york kouros ", which is the oldest fully preserved statue of " kouros " type , and seems to be the incarnation of the god himself .
the animistic idea as the representation of the imaginative reality , is sanctified in the homeric poems and in greek myths , in stories of the god hephaestus ( phaistos ) and the mythic daedalus ( the builder of the labyrinth ) that made images which moved of their own accord .
this kind of art goes back to the minoan period , when its main theme was the representation of motion in a specific moment .
these free-standing statues were usually marble , but also the form rendered in limestone , bronze , ivory and terracotta .
the earliest examples of life-sized statues of apollo , may be two figures from the ionic sanctuary on the island of delos .
such statues were found across the greek speaking world , the preponderance of these were found at the sanctuaries of apollo with more than one hundred from the sanctuary of " apollo ptoios ", boeotia alone .
the last stage in the development of the " kouros type " is the late archaic period ( 500000 bc ), in which the greek sculpture attained a full knowledge of human anatomy and used to create a relative harmonious whole .
ranking from the very few bronzes survived to us is the masterpiece bronze piraeus apollo .
it was found in piraeus , the harbour of athens .
the statue originally held the bow in its left hand , and a cup of pouring libation in its right hand .
it probably comes from north-eastern peloponnesus .
the emphasis is given in anatomy , and it is one of the first attempts to represent a kind of motion , and beauty relative to proportions , which appear mostly in post-archaic art .
the statue throws some light on an artistic centre which , with an independently developed harder , simpler and heavier style , restricts ionian influence in athens .
finally , this is the germ from which the art of polykleitos was to grow two or three generations later .
at the beginning of the classical period , it was considered that beauty in visible things as in everything else , consisted of symmetry and proportions .
the artists tried also to represent motion in a specific moment ( myron ), which may be considered as the reappearance of the dormant minoan element .
anatomy and geometry are fused in one , and each does something to the other .
the greek sculptors tried to clarify it by looking for mathematical proportions , just as they sought some reality behind appearances .
polykleitos in his " canon " wrote that beauty consists in the proportion not of the elements ( materials ), but of the parts , that is the interrelation of parts with one another and with the whole .
it seems that he was influenced by the theories of pythagoras .
the famous " apollo of mantua " and its variants are early forms of the apollo citharoedus statue type , in which the god holds the cithara in his left arm .
the type is represented by neo-attic imperial roman copies of the late 1st or early 2nd century , modelled upon a supposed greek bronze original made in the second quarter of the 5th century bce , in a style similar to works of polykleitos but more archaic .
the apollo held the " cythara " against his extended left arm , of which in the louvre example , a fragment of one twisting scrolling horn upright remains against his biceps .
though the proportions were always important in greek art , the appeal of the greek sculptures eludes any explanation by proportion alone .
the statues of apollo were thought to incarnate his living presence , and these representations of illusive imaginative reality had deep roots in the minoan period , and in the beliefs of the first greek speaking people who entered the region during the bronze-age .
just as the greeks saw the mountains , forests , sea and rivers as inhabited by concrete beings , so nature in all of its manifestations possesses clear form , and the form of a work of art .
spiritual life is incorporated in matter , when it is given artistic form .
just as in the arts the greeks sought some reality behind appearances , so in mathematics they sought permanent principles which could be applied wherever the conditions were the same .
artists and sculptors tried to find this ideal order in relation with mathematics , but they believed that this ideal order revealed itself not so much to the dispassionate intellect , as to the whole sentient self .
things as we see them , and as they really are , are one , that each stresses the nature of the other in a single unity .
in the archaic pediments and friezes of the temples , the artists had a problem to fit a group of figures into an isosceles triangle with acute angles at the base .
the siphnian treasury in delphi was one of the first greek buildings utilizing the solution to put the dominating form in the middle , and to complete the descending scale of height with other figures sitting or kneeling .
the pediment shows the story of heracles stealing apollo 's tripod that was strongly associated with his oracular inspiration .
their two figures hold the centre .
in the pediment of the temple of zeus in olympia , the single figure of apollo is dominating the scene .
these representations rely on presenting scenes directly to the eye for their own visible sake .
they care for the schematic arrangements of bodies in space , but only as parts in a larger whole .
while each scene has its own character and completeness it must fit into the general sequence to which it belongs .
in these archaic pediments the sculptors use empty intervals , to suggest a passage to and from a busy battlefield .
the artists seem to have been dominated by geometrical pattern and order , and this was improved when classical art brought a greater freedom and economy .
apollo as a handsome beardless young man , is often depicted with a kithara ( as apollo citharoedus ) or bow in his hand , or reclining on a tree ( the apollo lykeios and apollo sauroctonos types ).
the apollo belvedere is a marble sculpture that was rediscovered in the late 10th century ; for centuries it epitomized the ideals of classical antiquity for europeans , from the renaissance through the 10th century .
the marble is a hellenistic or roman copy of a bronze original by the greek sculptor leochares , made between 300 and 300 bce .
the life-size so-called " adonis " found in 1000 on the site of a " villa suburbana " near the via labicana in the roman suburb of centocelle is identified as an apollo by modern scholars .
in the late 2nd century ce floor mosaic from el djem , roman " thysdrus ", he is identifiable as apollo helios by his effulgent halo , though now even a god 's divine nakedness is concealed by his cloak , a mark of increasing conventions of modesty in the later empire .
another haloed apollo in mosaic , from hadrumentum , is in the museum at sousse .
the conventions of this representation , head tilted , lips slightly parted , large-eyed , curling hair cut in locks grazing the neck , were developed in the 3rd century bce to depict alexander the great .
some time after this mosaic was executed , the earliest depictions of christ would also be beardless and haloed .
apollo has often featured in postclassical art and literature .
percy bysshe shelley composed a " hymn of apollo " ( 1000 ), and the god 's instruction of the muses formed the subject of igor stravinsky 's " apollon musagte " ( 10000000 ).
in 1000 , the canadian band rush released an album with songs .
in discussion of the arts , a distinction is sometimes made between the apollonian and dionysian impulses where the former is concerned with imposing intellectual order and the latter with chaotic creativity .
friedrich nietzsche argued that a fusion of the two was most desirable .
carl jung 's apollo archetype represents what he saw as the disposition in people to over-intellectualise and maintain emotional distance .
charles handy , in " gods of management " ( 1000 ) uses greek gods as a metaphor to portray various types of organisational culture .
apollo represents a ' role ' culture where order , reason and bureaucracy prevail .
in spaceflight , the nasa program for landing astronauts on the moon was named apollo .
andre agassi
andre kirk agassi (; born april 20 , 1000 ) is an american retired professional tennis player and former world no .
1 who was one of the sport 's most dominant players from the early 1000s to the mid-2000s .
generally considered by critics and fellow players to be one of the greatest tennis players of all time , agassi has been called the greatest service returner in the history of the game .
described by the bbc upon his retirement as " perhaps the biggest worldwide star in the sport 's history ", agassi compiled performances that , along with his unorthodox apparel and attitude , saw him cited as one of the most charismatic players in history .
as a result , he is credited for helping to revive the popularity of tennis during the 1000s .
in singles tennis , agassi is an eight-time grand slam champion and a 1000 olympic gold medalist , as well as finishing runner-up in seven other grand slam tournaments .
during the open era , agassi was the first male player to win four australian open titles , a record that was later surpassed by novak djokovic when he won his fifth title in 2000 , and then by roger federer in 2000 .
agassi is one of five male singles players to achieve the career grand slam in the open era and one of eight in history , the first of two to achieve the career golden slam ( career grand slam and olympic gold medal , the other being rafael nadal ), and the only man to win the career golden slam and the atp tour world championships ( won in 1000 ): a distinction dubbed as a " career super slam " by " sports illustrated ".
agassi was the first male player to win all four grand slam tournaments on three different surfaces ( hard , clay and grass ), and the last american male to win both the french open ( in 1000 ) and the australian open ( in 2000 ).
he also won 10 atp masters series titles and was part of the winning davis cup teams in 1000 , 1000 and 1000 .
agassi reached the world no .
1 ranking for the first time in 1000 but was troubled by personal issues during the mid-to-late 1000s and sank to world no .
100 in 1000 , prompting many to believe that his career was over .
agassi returned to world no .
1 in 1000 and enjoyed the most successful run of his career over the next four years .
during his 20-plus year tour career , agassi was known by the nickname " the punisher ".
after suffering from sciatica caused by two bulging discs in his back , a spondylolisthesis ( vertebral displacement ) and a bone spur that interfered with the nerve , agassi retired from professional tennis on september 3 , 2000 , after losing in the third round of the us open to benjamin becker .
he is the founder of the andre agassi charitable foundation , which has raised over $ 60million for at-risk children in southern nevada .
in 2000 , the foundation opened the andre agassi college preparatory academy in las vegas , a k-10 public charter school for at-risk children .
he has been married to fellow tennis player steffi graf since 2000 .
andre agassi was born in las vegas , nevada to emmanuel " mike " agassi , a former olympic boxer from iran and elizabeth " betty " agassi ( ne dudley ).
his father stated he is from a mixed armenian and assyrian heritage .
one of his ancestors changed his surname from aghassian to agassi to avoid persecution .
andre agassi 's mother , betty , is a breast cancer survivor .
he has three older siblings rita ( last wife to pancho gonzales ), philip and tami .
in a passage from the book " open ", agassi details how his father made him play a match for money with football legend jim brown , in 1000 , when agassi was 9 years old .
brown was at a vegas tennis club complaining to the owner about a money match that was canceled .
agassi 's father stepped in and told brown that he could play his son and he would put up his house for the wager .
brown countered with a $ 10 , 000 bet , but after he was warned by the club owner not to take the bet because he would lose and be embarrassed , brown agreed with mike agassi that they would set the amount after he and andre played two sets .
brown lost those sets , 30 , 30 , declined the 10k wager , and offered to play the third set for $ 500 .
he lost 20 .
at age 10 , andre was sent to nick bollettieri 's tennis academy in florida .
he was meant to stay for only 3 months because that was all his father could afford .
after thirty minutes of watching agassi play , bollettieri called mike and said : " take your check back .
he 's here for free ," claiming that agassi had more natural talent than anyone else he had seen .
agassi dropped out of school in the ninth grade .
agassi turned professional at the age of 10 and competed in his first tournament at la quinta , california .
he won his first match against john austin , but then lost his second match to mats wilander .
by the end of 1000 , agassi was ranked world no .
90 .
he won his first top-level singles title in 1000 at the sul american open in itaparica and ended the year ranked world no .
20 .
he won six additional tournaments in 1000 ( memphis , u . s . men 's clay court championships , forest hills wct , stuttgart outdoor , volvo international and livingston open ), and , by december of that year , he had surpassed us $ 1million in career prize money after playing in just 40 tournamentsthe fastest anyone in history had reached that level .
during 1000 , he also set the open-era record for most consecutive victories by a male teenager ( a record that stood for 10 years until rafael nadal broke it in 2000 ).
his year-end ranking was world no .
3 , behind second-ranked ivan lendl and top-ranked mats wilander .
both the association of tennis professionals and " tennis " magazine named agassi the most improved player of the year for 1000 .
in addition to not playing the australian open ( which later became his best grand slam event ) for the first eight years of his career , agassi chose not to play at wimbledon from 1000 through 1000 and publicly stated that he did not wish to play there because of the event 's traditionalism , particularly its " predominantly white " dress code to which players at the event are required to conform .
strong performances on the tour meant that agassi was quickly tipped as a future grand slam champion .
while still a teenager , he reached the semifinals of both the french open and the us open in 1000 and made the us open semifinals in 1000 .
he began the 1000s with a series of near-misses .
he reached his first grand slam final in 1000 at the french open , where he was favored before losing in four sets to andrs gmez , which he attributes to worrying about his wig falling off .
he reached his second grand slam final of the year at the us open , defeating defending champion boris becker in the semifinals .
his opponent in the final was pete sampras ; a year earlier , agassi had crushed sampras , after which he told his coach that he felt bad for sampras because he was never going to make it as a pro .
agassi lost the us open final to sampras in three sets .
the rivalry between these two american players became the dominant rivalry in tennis over the rest of the decade .
also in 1000 , agassi helped the united states win its first davis cup in 8 years and won his only tennis masters cup , beating reigning wimbledon champion stefan edberg in the final .
in 1000 , agassi reached his second consecutive french open final , where he faced fellow bollettieri academy alumnus jim courier .
courier emerged the victor in a five-set final .
agassi decided to play at wimbledon in 1000 , leading to weeks of speculation in the media about the clothes he would wear .
he eventually emerged for the first round in a completely white outfit .
he reached the quarterfinals on that occasion , losing in five sets to david wheaton .
agassi 's grand slam tournament breakthrough came at wimbledon , not at the french open or the us open , where he had previously enjoyed success .
in 1000 , he defeated goran ivanievi in a five-set final .
along the way , agassi overcame two former wimbledon champions : boris becker and john mcenroe .
no other baseliner would triumph at wimbledon until lleyton hewitt ten years later .
agassi was named the bbc overseas sports personality of the year in 1000 .
agassi once again played on the united states ' davis cup winning team in 1000 .
it was their second davis cup title in three years .
in 1000 , agassi won the only doubles title of his career , at the cincinnati masters , partnered with petr korda .
he missed much of the early part of that year due to injuries .
although he made the quarterfinals in his wimbledon title defense , he lost to eventual champion and world no .
1 pete sampras in five sets .
agassi lost in the first round at the us open to thomas enqvist and required wrist surgery late in the year .
with new coach brad gilbert on board , agassi began to employ more of a tactical , consistent approach , which fueled his resurgence .
he started slowly in 1000 , losing in the first week at the french open and wimbledon .
nevertheless , he emerged during the hard-court season , winning the canadian open .
his comeback culminated at the 1000 us open with a five-set fourth-round victory against compatriot michael chang .
he then became the first man to capture the us open as an unseeded player , beating michael stich in the final .
along the way , he beat 5 seeded players .
in 1000 , agassi shaved his balding head , breaking with his old " image is everything " style .
he competed in the 1000 australian open ( his first appearance at the event ) and won , beating sampras in a four-set final .
agassi and sampras met in five tournament finals in 1000 , all on hardcourt , with agassi winning three .
agassi won three masters series events in 1000 ( cincinnati , key biscayne , and the canadian open ) and seven titles total .
he compiled a career-best 20-match winning streak during the summer hard-court circuit , with the last victory being in an intense late night four-set semifinal of the us open against boris becker .
the streak ended the next day when agassi lost the final to sampras .
agassi reached the world no .
1 ranking for the first time in april 1000 .
he held that ranking until november , for a total of 30 weeks .
agassi skipped most of the fall indoor season which allowed sampras to surpass him and finish ranked no .
1 at the year-ending ranking .
in terms of win/loss record , 1000 was agassi 's best year .
he won 70 matches while losing 9 and was also once again a key player on the united states ' davis cup winning teamthe third and final davis cup title of agassi 's career .
1000 was a less successful year for agassi , as he failed to reach any grand slam final .
he suffered two early-round losses at the hands of compatriots chris woodruff and doug flach at the french open and wimbledon , respectively , and lost to chang in straight sets in the australian and us open semifinals .
at the time , agassi blamed the australian open loss on the windy conditions , but later said in his biography that he had lost the match on purpose , as he did not want to play boris becker , whom he would have faced in that final .
the high point for agassi was winning the men 's singles gold medal at the olympic games in atlanta , beating sergi bruguera of spain in the final .
agassi also successfully defended his singles titles in cincinnati and key biscayne .
1000 was the low point of agassi 's career .
his wrist injury resurfaced , and he played only 20 matches during the year .
he later confessed that he started using crystal methamphetamine at that time , allegedly on the urging of a friend .
he failed an atp drug test , but wrote a letter claiming the same friend had spiked a drink .
the atp dropped the failed drug test as a warning .
in his autobiography , agassi admitted that the letter was a lie .
he quit the drug soon after .
at this time agassi was also in a failing marriage with actress brooke shields and had lost interest in the game .
he won no top-level titles , and his ranking sank to world no .
100 on november 10 , 1000 , prompting many to believe that his run as one of the sport 's premier competitors was over and that he would never again win any significant championships .
in 1000 , agassi began a rigorous conditioning program and worked his way back up the rankings by playing in challenger series tournaments , a circuit for pro players ranked outside the world 's top 50 .
after returning to top physical and mental shape , agassi recorded the most successful period of his tennis career and also played classic matches in that period against pete sampras and patrick rafter .
in 1000 , agassi won five titles and leapt from world no .
100 to no .
6 , the highest jump into the top 10 made by any player during a calendar year .
at wimbledon , he had an early loss in the second round to tommy haas .
he won five titles in ten finals and was runner-up at the masters series tournament in key biscayne , losing to marcelo ros , who became world no .
1 as a result .
at the year end he was awarded the atp most improved player of the year for the second time in his career ( the first being 10 years earlier in 1000 ).
agassi entered the history books in 1000 when he came back from two sets to love down to beat andrei medvedev in a five-set french open final , becoming , at the time , only the fifth male player ( joining rod laver , fred perry , roy emerson and don budgethese have since been joined by roger federer , rafael nadal , and novak djokovic ) to win all four grand slam singles titles during his career .
only laver , agassi , federer , nadal and djokovic have achieved this feat during the open era .
this win also made him the first ( of only four , the next being federer , nadal and djokovic respectively ) male player in history to have won all four grand slam titles on three different surfaces ( clay , grass and hard courts ).
agassi also became the only male player to win the career super slam , consisting of all four grand slam tournaments plus an olympic gold medal in singles and a year-end championship .
agassi followed his 1000 french open victory by reaching the wimbledon final , where he lost to sampras in straight sets .
he rebounded from his wimbledon defeat by winning the us open , beating todd martin in five sets ( rallying from a two sets to one deficit ) in the final .
overall during the year agassi won 5 titles including two majors and the atp masters series in paris , where he beat marat safin .
agassi ended 1000 as the world no .
1 , ending sampras 's record of six consecutive year-ending top rankings ( 100000 ).
this was the only time agassi ended the year at no .
1 .
he began the next year by capturing his second australian open title , beating sampras in a five-set semifinal and yevgeny kafelnikov in a four-set final .
he was the first male player to have reached four consecutive grand slam finals since rod laver achieved the grand slam in 1000 .
at the time , agassi was also only the fourth player since laver to be the reigning champion of three of four grand slam events , missing only the wimbledon title .. 2000 also saw agassi reach the semifinals at wimbledon , where he lost in five sets to rafter in a match considered by many to be one of the best ever at wimbledon .
at the inaugural tennis masters cup in lisbon , agassi reached the final after defeating marat safin in the semifinals to end the russian 's hopes to become the youngest world no .
1 in the history of tennis .
agassi then lost to gustavo kuerten in the final , allowing kuerten to be crowned year-end world no .
1 .
agassi opened 2000 by successfully defending his australian open title with a straight-sets final win over arnaud clment .
en route , he beat a cramping rafter in five sets in front of a sell-out crowd in what turned out to be the aussie 's last australian open .
at wimbledon , they met again in the semifinals , where agassi lost another close match to rafter , 80 in the fifth set .
in the quarterfinals at the us open , agassi lost a 3-hour , 30minute epic match with sampras , 70 , 60 , 60 , 60 , with no breaks of serve during the 50-game match .
despite the setback , agassi finished 2000 ranked world no .
3 , becoming the only male tennis player to finish a year ranked in the top 3 in three different decades ( 1000s , 1000s , 2000s ).
he also was the oldest player ( age 30 ) to finish in the top three since 30-year-old connors finished at world no .
2 in 1000 .
2000 opened with disappointment for agassi , as injury forced him to skip the australian open , where he was a two-time defending champion .
agassi recovered from the injury and later that year defended his key biscayne title beating then rising roger federer in a four-set final .
the last duel between agassi and sampras came in the final of the us open , which sampras won in four sets and left sampras with a 2000 edge in their 30 career meetings .
the match was the last of sampras 's career .
agassi 's us open finish , along with his masters series victories in key biscayne , rome and madrid , helped him finish 2000 as the oldest year-end world no .
2 at 30 years and 8 months .
in 2000 , agassi won the eighth ( and final ) grand slam title of his career at the australian open , where he beat rainer schttler in straight sets in the final .
in march , he won his sixth career and third consecutive key biscayne title , in the process surpassing his wife , steffi graf , who was a five-time winner of the event .
the final was his 10th straight win in that tournament , which broke the previous record of 10 set by sampras from 100000 .
( agassi 's winning streak continued to 20 after winning his first two matches at the 2000 edition of that tournament before bowing to agustn calleri .)
with the victory , agassi became the youngest ( 10 years old ) and oldest ( 30 ) winner of the key biscayne tournament .
on april 20 , 2000 , he recaptured the world no .
1 ranking after a quarterfinal victory over xavier malisse at the queen 's club championships to become the oldest top-ranked male player since the atp rankings began at 30 years and 10 days .
he had held the world no .
1 ranking for two weeks , when lleyton hewitt took it back on may 10 , 2000 .
agassi then recaptured the world no .
1 ranking once again on june 10 , 2000 , which he held for 10 weeks until september 7 , 2000 .
during his career , agassi held the world no .
1 ranking for a total of 100 weeks .
agassi 's ranking slipped when injuries forced him to withdraw from many events .
he did manage to reach the us open semifinals , where he lost to juan carlos ferrero and surrendered his world no .
1 ranking to ferrero .
at the year-end tennis masters cup , agassi lost in the final to federer and finished the year ranked world no .
4 .
at age 30 , he was the oldest player to rank in the top 5 since connors , at age 30 , was world no .
4 in 1000 .
in 2000 , agassi began the year with a five-set loss in the semifinals of the australian open to marat safin ; the loss ended agassi 's 20-match winning streak at the event , a record that still stands .
he won the masters series event in cincinnati to bring his career total to 50 top-level singles titles and a record 10 atp masters series titles , having already won seven of the nine atp masters tournamentall except the tournaments in monte carlo and hamburg .
at 30 , he became the second-oldest singles champion in cincinnati tournament history ( the tournament began in 1000 ), surpassed only by ken rosewall , who won the title in 1000 at age 30 .
he finished the year ranked world no .
8 , the oldest player to finish in the top 10 since the 30-year-old connors was world no .
7 in 1000 .
agassi also became only the sixth male player during the open era to reach 800 career wins with his first-round victory over alex bogomolov in countrywide classic in los angeles .
agassi 's 2000 began with a quarterfinal loss to federer at the australian open .
agassi had several other deep runs at tournaments , but had to withdraw from several events due to injury .
he lost to jarkko nieminen in the first round of the french open .
he won his fourth title in los angeles and reached the final of the rogers cup , before falling to world no .
2 rafael nadal .
agassi 's 2000 was defined by an improbable run to the us open final .
after beating rzvan sabu and ivo karlovi in straight sets and tom berdych in four sets , agassi won three consecutive five-set matches to advance to the final .
the most notable of these matches was his quarterfinal victory over james blake , where he rallied from two sets down to win 70 in the fifth set .
his other five-set victims were xavier malisse in the fourth round and robby ginepri in the semifinals .
in the final , agassi faced federer , who was seeking his second consecutive us open title and his sixth grand slam title in two years .
federer defeated agassi in four sets .
agassi finished 2000 ranked world no .
7 , his 10th time in the year-end top-10 rankings , which tied connors for the most times ranked in the top 10 at year 's end .
agassi had a poor start to 2000 .
he was still recovering from an ankle injury and also suffering from back and leg pain and lack of match play .
agassi withdrew from the australian open because of the ankle injury , and his back injury and other pains forced him to withdraw from several other events , eventually skipping the entire clay-court season including the french open .
this caused his ranking to drop out of the top 10 for the last time .
agassi returned for the grass-court season , playing a tune-up , and then wimbledon .
he was defeated in the third round by world no .
2 ( and eventual runner-up ) rafael nadal .
against conventions , agassi , the losing player , was interviewed on court after the match .
at wimbledon , agassi announced his plans to retire following the us open .
agassi played only two events during the summer hard-court season with his best result being a quarterfinal loss at the countrywide classic in los angeles to fernando gonzlez of chile , which resulted in him being unseeded at the us open .
agassi had a short , but dramatic , run in his final us open .
because of extreme back pain , agassi was forced to receive anti-inflammatory injections after every match .
after a tough four-set win against andrei pavel , agassi faced eighth-seeded marcos baghdatis in the second round who had earlier advanced to the 2000 australian open final and wimbledon semifinals .
agassi won in five tough sets as the younger baghdatis succumbed to muscle cramping in the final set .
in his last match , agassi fell to 100th-ranked big-serving benjamin becker of germany in four sets .
agassi received a four-minute standing ovation from the crowd after the match and delivered a retirement speech .
agassi earned more than $ 30million in prize-money during his career , sixth only to djokovic , federer , nadal , sampras and murray to date ( october 20 , 2000 ).
he also earned more than $ 20million a year through endorsements during his career , fourth in all sports at the time .
since retiring after the 2000 us open , agassi has participated in a series of charity tournaments and continues his work with his own charity .
on september 5 , 2000 , he was a surprise guest commentator for the andy roddick/roger federer us open quarterfinal .
he played an exhibition match at wimbledon , teaming with his wife , steffi graf , to play with tim henman and kim clijsters .
he played world team tennis for the philadelphia freedoms in the summer of 2000 .
at the 2000 french open , agassi was on hand to present roger federer , who completed his career grand slam by winning the tournament and joined agassi as one of six men to complete the career grand slam , with the trophy .
also in 2000 agassi played at the outback champions series event for the first time .
he played the cancer treatment centers of america tennis championships at surprise , arizona , where he reached the final before bowing to eventual champion todd martin .
he also announced that he will not be playing the tour on a full-time basis , and played the tournament as a favor to long-time friend jim courier .
agassi returned to the tour renamed for the powershares series in 2000 and participated in a total of seven events while winning two .
agassi beat courier in the final of the staples champions cup in boston and later defeated sampras at the ctca championships at his hometown las vegas .
in 2000 , agassi took part in five tournaments , winning three of those .
in november , at first he won bilt champions showdown in san jose , beating john mcenroe in the final .
the following day , he defended his title of the ctca championships , while defeating courier in the decisive match .
in the series season finale , he beat michael chang for the acura champions cup .
the series and agassi came back to action in 2000 .
agassi won both tournaments he participated in .
at the camden wealth advisors cup 's final in houston , agassi beat james blake for a rematch of their 2000 us open quarterfinal .
he defeated blake again in portland to win the title of the cancer treatment centers of america championships .
in 2000 , agassi took part in just one event of the powershares series , losing to mark philippoussis in the final of the champions shootout .
in 2000 , in macau agassi and sampras met for the first time on court since the 2000 us open final .
sampras won the exhibition in three sets .
the rivalry between the former champions headlined sports media again in march 2000 after the two participated in the " hit for haiti " charity event organized to raise money for the victims of the earthquake .
partnered with roger federer and rafael nadal , the old rivals began making jokes on each other which ended up with sampras intentionally striking a serve at agassi 's body .
after the event agassi admitted that he had crossed the line with his jokes and publicly apologized to sampras .
agassi and sampras met again one year later for an exhibition match at madison square garden in new york in front of 10 000 spectators as sampras defeated agassi in two sets .
on march 3 , 2000 , agassi and sampras squared off for an exhibition in london for the annual world tennis day .
this time it was agassi who came out on top in two straight sets .
he returned to the tour in may 2000 in the position of coach to novak djokovic for the french open .
early in his career , agassi would look to end points quickly by playing first-strike tennis , typically by inducing a weak return with a deep , hard shot , and then playing a winner at an extreme angle .
his groundstrokes , return of serve , baseline game , anticipation , and eyehand coordination were always among the best in the game .
on the rare occasion that he charged the net , agassi liked to take the ball in the air and hit a swinging volley for the winner .
his favored groundstroke was his flat , accurate two-handed backhand , hit well cross-court but in particular down the line .
his forehand was nearly as strong , in particular his inside-out forehand to the ad court .
agassi 's strength was in dictating play from the back of the court .
while he was growing up , his father and nick bollettieri trained him in this way .
when in control of a point , agassi would often pass up an opportunity to attempt a winner and hit a conservative shot to minimize his errors , and to make his opponent run more .
this change to more methodical , less aggressive baseline play was largely initiated by his longtime coach , brad gilbert , in their first year together in 1000 .
gilbert encouraged agassi to wear out opponents with his deep , flat groundstrokes and to use his fitness to win attrition wars , and noted agassi 's two-handed backhand down the line as his very best shot .
a signature play later in his career was a change up drop shot to the deuce court after deep penetrating groundstrokes .
this would often be followed by a passing shot or lob if the opponent was fast enough to retrieve it .
agassi was raised on hardcourts , but found much of his early major-tournament success on the red clay of roland garros , reaching two consecutive finals there early in his career .
despite grass being his worst surface , his first major win was at the slick grass of wimbledon in 1000 , a tournament that he professed to hating at the time .
his strongest surface over the course of his career , was indeed hardcourt , where he won six of his eight majors .
agassi established a limited liability company named andre agassi ventures ( formerly named agassi enterprises ).
agassi , along with five athlete partners ( including wayne gretzky , joe montana , shaquille o ' neal , ken griffey , jr ., and monica seles ) opened a chain of sports-themed restaurant named official all star caf in april 1000 .
the restaurant closed down in 2000 .
in 1000 , he paid $ 1 million for a 10 percent stake in nevada first bank and made a $ 10 million profit when it was sold to western alliance bancorp in 2000 .
in 2000 , he joined the tennis channel to promote the channel to consumers and cable and satellite industry , and made an equity investment in the network .
after meeting chef michael mina at one of his restaurants in san francisco , agassi partnered with him in 2000 to start mina group inc . and opened 10 concept restaurants in san francisco , san jose , dana point , atlantic city and las vegas .
agassi was an equity investor of a group that acquired golden nugget las vegas and golden nugget laughlin from mgm mirage for $ 200 million in 2000 .
one year later , the group sold the hotel-casino to landry 's , inc . for $ 100 million in cash and $ 100 million in assumed debt .
in 2000 , he sat on the board of meadows bank , an independent bank in nevada .
he has invested in start-up companies backed by allen & company .
agassi and graf formed a company called agassi graf holdings .
they invested in pure , a nightclub at caesars palace , which opened in 2000 , and sold it to angel management group in 2000 .
in august 2000 , agassi and graf developed a joint venture with high-end furniture maker kreiss enterprises .
they launched a furniture line called agassi graf collection .
in september , agassi and graf , through their company agassi graf development llc , along with bayview financial lp , finalized an agreement to develop a condominium hotel , fairmont tamarack , at tamarack resort in donnelly , idaho .
due to difficult market conditions and delays , they withdrew from the project in 2000 .
the group still owns three small chunks of land .
in september , they collaborated with steve case 's exclusive resorts to co-develop luxury resorts and design agassi-graf tennis and fitness centers .
they also invested in online ticket reseller viagogo in 2000 and both serve as board members and advisors of the company .
in october 2000 , village roadshow and investors including agassi and graf announced plans to build new water park called wet ' n ' wild las vegas in las vegas .
village roadshow has a 50 % stake in the park while agassi , graf , and other private investors hold the remaining 40 %.
the park opened in may 2000 .
img managed agassi from the time he turned pro in 1000 through january 2000 before switching to sfx sports group .
his business manager , lawyer and agent was childhood friend perry rogers , but they have been estranged since 2000 .
in 2000 , he and graf signed with caa .
agassi used prince graphite rackets early in his career .
he signed a $ 7 million endorsement contract with belgian tennis racquet makers donnay .
he later switched to head ti radical racket and head 's liquidmetal radical racket , having signed a multimillion-dollar endorsement deal with head in 1000 .
he renewed his contract in 1000 and in november 2000 , he signed a lifetime agreement with head .
he also endorses penn tennis balls .
on july 20 , 2000 , agassi left nike after 10 years and signed an endorsement deal with adidas .
a major reason for agassi leaving nike was because nike refused to donate to agassi 's charities , and adidas was more than happy to do so .
on may 10 , 2000 , agassi rejoined nike .
agassi was sponsored by dupont , ebel , mountain dew in 1000 , mazda in 1000 , kia motors in 2000 , american express and deutsche bank in 2000 .
in 1000 , he appeared in a television commercial for canon inc ., promoting the canon eos rebel camera .
between 1000 and 2000 , he signed a multimillion-dollar , multiyear endorsement deal with schick and became the worldwide spokesman for the company .
agassi signed a multiyear contract with twinlab and promoted the company 's nutritional supplements .
in mid-2000 , he was named the spokesman of aramis life , a fragrance by aramis and signed a five-year deal with the company .
in march 2000 , he signed a ten-year agreement worth $ 1 . 5 million a year with 20 hour fitness , which will open five andre agassi fitness centers by year-end .
prior to the 2000 australian open , agassi and australian winemaker jacobs creek announced a three-year partnership and created the open film series to "[ share ] personal stories about the life defining moments that shaped his character on and off the court ."
in 2000 , watchmaker longines named agassi as their brand ambassador .
agassi and his mother appeared in a got milk ?
advertisement in 2000 .
agassi has appeared in many advertisements and television commercials with graf .
they both endorsed deutsche telekom in 2000 , genworth financial and canon inc . in 2000 , lvmh in 2000 , and nintendo wii and wii fit u and longines in 2000 .
in the early 1000s agassi dated american entertainer barbra streisand .
writing about the relationship in his 2000 autobiography , he said , " we agree that we ' re good for each other , and so what if she 's twenty-eight years older ?
we ' re sympatico , and the public outcry only adds spice to our connection .
it makes our friendship feel forbidden , taboo another piece of my overall rebellion .
dating barbra streisand is like wearing hot lava ."
agassi was married to brooke shields from 1000 to 1000 .
he married steffi graf on october 20 , 2000 , at their las vegas home after the 1000 french open , with only their mothers as witnesses .
they have two children : son jaden gil ( born 2000 ) and daughter jaz elle ( born 2000 ).
agassi has said that he and graf are not pushing their children toward becoming tennis players .
the graf-agassi family resides in summerlin , a community in the las vegas valley .
graf 's mother and her brother , michael graf , with his four children also live there .
long-time trainer gil reyes has been called one of agassi 's closest friends ; some have described him as being a " father figure " to agassi .
in 2000 , agassi and reyes introduced their own line of fitness equipment , bilt by agassi and reyes .
in december 2000 , agassi 's childhood friend and former business manager , perry rogers , sued graf for $ 50 , 000 in management fees he claimed that she owed him .
agassi 's autobiography , " open : an autobiography ," ( written with assistance from j . r . moehringer ), was published in november 2000 .
in it , agassi admitted that he used and tested positive for methamphetamine in 1000 .
in response to this revelation , roger federer declared himself shocked and disappointed , while marat safin argued that agassi should return his prize money and be stripped of his titles .
in an exclusive interview with cbs , agassi justified himself and asked for understanding , saying that " it was a period in my life where i needed help ."
he also revealed that he had always hated tennis during his career because of the constant pressure it exerted on him .
he also revealed he wore a hairpiece earlier in his career and thought pete sampras was " robotic ".
the book reached no .
1 on the " new york times " best seller list and received favorable reviews .
it won the autobiography category of the 2000 british sports book awards .
agassi has donated more than $ 100 , 000 to democratic candidates .
on september 1 , 2000 , when he appeared on daily wnyc public radio program " the brian lehrer show ," he stated that he is a registered independent .
agassi founded the andre agassi charitable association in 1000 , which assists las vegas ' young people .
he was awarded the atp arthur ashe humanitarian award in 1000 for his efforts to help disadvantaged youth .
he is regularly cited as the most charitable and socially involved player in professional tennis .
it has also been claimed that he may be the most charitable athlete of his generation .
agassi 's charities help in assisting children reach their athletic potential .
his boys & girls club sees 2 , 000 children throughout the year and boasts a world-class junior tennis team .
it also has a basketball program ( the agassi stars ) and a rigorous system that encourages a mix of academics and athletics .
in 2000 , agassi opened the andre agassi college preparatory academy in las vegas , a tuition-free charter school for at-risk children in the area .
he personally donated $ 30 million to the school .
in 2000 , the graduating class had 100 percent graduation rate and expected a 100 percent college acceptance rate .
among other child-related programs that agassi supports through his andre agassi charitable foundation is clark county 's only residential facility for abused and neglected children , child haven .
in 1000 , agassi donated funding to child haven for a six-room classroom building now named the agassi center for education .
his foundation also provided $ 700 , 000 to assist in the building of the andre agassi cottage for medically fragile children .
this 20-bed facility opened in december 2000 , and accommodates developmentally delayed or handicapped children and children quarantined for infectious diseases .
in 2000 , along with several other athletes , agassi founded the charity athletes for hope , which helps professional athletes get involved in charitable causes and aims to inspire all people to volunteer and support their communities .
he created the canyon-agassi charter school facilities fund and is now known as the turner-agassi charter school facilities fund .
the fund is an investment initiative for social change , focusing on the " nationwide effort to move charters from stopgap buildings into permanent campuses ."
it has funded over 30 campuses for high performing charter schools and seeks to provide investors with a healthy return .
in september 2000 , the andre agassi foundation for education formed a partnership with v20 foods to launch box budd ! es , a line of kids ' healthy snacks .
all proceeds go to the foundation .
in february 2000 , agassi remodeled the vacant university of phoenix building as a new school called the doral academy west through the canyon-agassi charter school facilities fund .
doral academy opened in august 2000 .
the fund purchased a 4 . 6-acre plot in henderson , nevada to house the somerset academy of las vegas , which will relocate from its campus inside a church .
by winning the 1000 french open , agassi completed a men 's singles career grand slam .
he is the 5th of 8 male players in history ( after budge , perry , laver , emerson and before roger federer , rafael nadal and novak djokovic ) to achieve this .
austroasiatic languages
the austroasiatic languages , in recent classifications synonymous with monkhmer , are a large language family of continental southeast asia , also scattered throughout india , bangladesh , nepal and the southern border of china .
the name " austroasiatic " comes from the latin words for " south " and " asia ", hence " south asia ".
of these languages , only vietnamese , khmer , and mon have a long-established recorded history , and only vietnamese and khmer have official status as modern national languages ( in vietnam and cambodia , respectively ).
on the subnational level , khasi has official status in meghalaya while santhali , ho and mundari are official languages of jharkhand .
in myanmar , the wa language is the de facto official language of wa state .
the rest of the languages are spoken by minority groups and have no official status .
" ethnologue " identifies 100 austroasiatic languages .
these form thirteen established families ( plus perhaps shompen , which is poorly attested , as a fourteenth ), which have traditionally been grouped into two , as monkhmer and munda .
however , one recent classification posits three groups ( munda , nuclear mon-khmer and khasikhmuic ) while another has abandoned monkhmer as a taxon altogether , making it synonymous with the larger family .
austroasiatic languages have a disjunct distribution across india , bangladesh , nepal and southeast asia , separated by regions where other languages are spoken .
they appear to be the extant autochthonous languages of southeast asia ( if andaman islands are not included ), with the neighboring indo-aryan , taikadai , dravidian , austronesian , and sino-tibetan languages being the result of later migrations .
regarding word structure , austroasiatic languages are well known for having an iambic " sesquisyllabic " pattern , with basic nouns and verbs consisting of an initial , unstressed , reduced minor syllable followed by a stressed , full syllable .
this reduction of presyllables has led to a variety among modern languages of phonological shapes of the same original proto-austroasiatic prefixes , such as the causative prefix , ranging from cvc syllables to consonant clusters to single consonants .
as for word formation , most austroasiatic languages have a variety of derivational prefixes , many have infixes , but suffixes are almost completely non-existent in most branches except munda , and a few specialized exceptions in other austroasiatic branches .
the austroasiatic languages are further characterized as having unusually large vowel inventories and employing some sort of register contrast , either between modal ( normal ) voice and breathy ( lax ) voice or between modal voice and creaky voice .
languages in the pearic branch and some in the vietic branch can have a three - or even four-way voicing contrast .
however , some austroasiatic languages have lost the register contrast by evolving more diphthongs or in a few cases , such as vietnamese , tonogenesis .
vietnamese has been so heavily influenced by chinese that its original austroasiatic phonological quality is obscured and now resembles that of south chinese languages , whereas khmer , which had more influence from sanskrit , has retained a more typically austroasiatic structure .
much work has been done on the reconstruction of proto-monkhmer in harry l . shorto 's " monkhmer comparative dictionary ".
little work has been done on the munda languages , which are not well documented .
with their demotion from a primary branch , proto-monkhmer becomes synonymous with proto-austroasiatic .
paul sidwell ( 2000 ) reconstructs the consonant inventory of proto-monkhmer as follows :
this is identical to earlier reconstructions except for .
is better preserved in the katuic languages , which sidwell has specialized in .
sidwell ( 2000 ) suggests that the likely homeland of austroasiatic is the middle mekong , in the area of the bahnaric and katuic languages ( approximately where modern laos , thailand , and cambodia come together ), and that the family is not as old as frequently assumed , dating to perhaps 2000 bce .
linguists traditionally recognize two primary divisions of austroasiatic : the monkhmer languages of southeast asia , northeast india and the nicobar islands , and the munda languages of east and central india and parts of bangladesh , parts of nepal .
however , no evidence for this classification has ever been published .
each of the families that is written in boldface type below is accepted as a valid clade .
by contrast , the relationships " between " these families within austroasiatic are debated .
in addition to the traditional classification , two recent proposals are given , neither of which accepts traditional " monkhmer " as a valid unit .
however , little of the data used for competing classifications has ever been published , and therefore cannot be evaluated by peer review .
in addition , there are suggestions that additional branches of austroasiatic might be preserved in substrata of acehnese in sumatra ( diffloth ), the chamic languages of vietnam , and the land dayak languages of borneo ( adelaar 1000 ).
diffloth 's widely cited original classification , now abandoned by diffloth himself , is used in " encyclopdia britannica " andexcept for the breakup of southern monkhmerin " ethnologue ."
peiros is a lexicostatistic classification , based on percentages of shared vocabulary .
this means that languages can appear to be more distantly related than they actually are due to language contact .
indeed , when sidwell ( 2000a ) replicated peiros 's study with languages known well enough to account for loans , he did not find the internal ( branching ) structure below .
diffloth compares reconstructions of various clades , and attempts to classify them based on shared innovations , though like other classifications the evidence has not been published .
as a schematic , we have :
or in more detail ,
this family tree is consistent with recent studies of migration of y-chromosomal haplogroup o2a1-m90 .
however , the dates obtained from by zhivotovsky method dna studies are several times older than that given by linguists .
the route map of the people with haplogroup o2a1-m90 , speaking this language can be seen in this link .
other geneticists criticise the zhivotovsky method .
roger blench ( 2000 ) also proposes that there might have been other primary branches of austroasiatic that are now extinct , based on substrate evidence in modern-day languages .
other languages with proposed austroasiatic substrata are :
paul sidwell ( 2000a ), in a lexicostatistical comparison of 30 languages which are well-known enough to exclude loan words , finds little evidence for internal branching , though he did find an area of increased contact between the bahnaric and katuic languages , such that languages of all branches apart from the geographically distant munda and nicobarese show greater similarity to bahnaric and katuic the closer they are to those branches , without any noticeable innovations common to bahnaric and katuic .
he therefore takes the conservative view that the thirteen branches of austroasiatic should be treated as equidistant on current evidence .
sidwell & blench ( 2000 ) discuss this proposal in more detail , and note that there is good evidence for a khasipalaungic node , which could also possibly be closely related to khmuic .
if this would the case , sidwell & blench suggest that khasic may have been an early offshoot of palaungic that had spread westward .
sidwell & blench ( 2000 ) suggest shompen as an additional branch , and believe that a vieto-katuic connection is worth investigating .
in general , however , the family is thought to have diversified too quickly for a deeply nested structure to have developed , since proto-austroasiatic speakers are believed by sidwell to have radiated out from the central mekong river valley relatively quickly .
other than latin-based alphabets , many austroasiatic languages are written with the ancient khmer alphabet , thai alphabet and lao alphabet .
vietnamese divergently had an indigenous script based on chinese logographic writing .
this has since been supplanted by the latin alphabet in the 20th century .
the following are examples of past-used alphabets or current alphabets of austroasiatic languages .
according to chaubey et al ., " austro-asiatic speakers in india today are derived from dispersal from southeast asia , followed by extensive sex-specific admixture with local indian populations ."
according to riccio et al .
( 2000 ), the munda people are likely descended from austroasiatic migrants from southeast asia .
according to zhang et al .
( 2000 ), austroasiatic migrations from southeast asia into india took place after the last glacial maximum , circa 10 , 000 years ago .
afroasiatic languages
afroasiatic ( afro-asiatic ), also known as afrasian and traditionally as hamito-semitic ( chamito-semitic ), is a large language family of several hundred related languages and dialects .
it comprises about 300 or so living languages and dialects , according to the 2000 ethnologue estimate .
it includes languages spoken predominantly in west asia , north africa , the horn of africa , and parts of the sahel .
afroasiatic languages have over 300 million native speakers , the fourth largest number of any language family ( after indo-european , sino-tibetan and nigercongo ).
the phylum has six branches : berber , chadic , cushitic , egyptian , omotic and semitic .
by far the most widely spoken afroasiatic language is arabic .
it is also the most widely spoken language within the semitic branch , and includes modern standard arabic and spoken colloquial varieties .
arabic has around 200 million native speakers , who are concentrated primarily in west asia , north africa , the horn of africa , and malta .
other widely spoken afroasiatic languages include :
in addition to languages spoken today , afroasiatic includes several important ancient languages , such as ancient egyptian , akkadian , biblical hebrew , and old aramaic .
it is uncertain when or where the original homeland of the afroasiatic family existed .
proposed locations include north africa , the horn of africa , the eastern sahara , and the levant .
during the early 1000s , linguists grouped the berber , cushitic and egyptian languages within a " hamitic " phylum , in acknowledgement of these languages ' genetic relation with each other and with those in the semitic phylum .
the terms " hamitic " and " semitic " were etymologically derived from the book of genesis , which describes various biblical tribes descended from ham and shem , two sons of noah .
by the 1000s , the main constituent elements within the broader afroasiatic family had been worked out .
the scholar friedrich mller introduced the name " hamito-semitic " for the entire family in his " grundriss der sprachwissenschaft " ( 1000 ).
maurice delafosse ( 1000 ) later coined the term " afroasiatic " ( often now spelled " afro-asiatic ").
however , it did not come into general use until joseph greenberg ( 1000 ) formally proposed its adoption .
in doing so , greenberg sought to emphasize the fact that afroasiatic spanned the continents of both africa and asia .
individual scholars have also called the family " erythraean " ( tucker 1000 ) and " lisramic " ( hodge 1000 ).
in lieu of " hamito-semitic ", the russian linguist igor diakonoff later suggested the term " afrasian ", meaning " half african , half asiatic ", in reference to the geographic distribution of the family 's constituent languages .
the term " hamito-semitic " remains in use in the academic traditions of some european countries .
the afroasiatic language family is usually considered to include the following branches :
although there is general agreement on these six families , there are some points of disagreement among linguists who study afroasiatic .
in particular :
in the 9th century , the hebrew grammarian judah ibn quraysh of tiaret in algeria was the first to link two branches of afroasiatic together ; he perceived a relationship between berber and semitic .
he knew of semitic through his study of arabic , hebrew , and aramaic .
in the course of the 10th century , europeans also began suggesting such relationships .
in 1000 , theodor benfey suggested a language family consisting of semitic , berber , and cushitic ( calling the latter " ethiopic ").
in the same year , t . n .
newman suggested a relationship between semitic and hausa , but this would long remain a topic of dispute and uncertainty .
friedrich mller named the traditional hamito-semitic family in 1000 in his " grundriss der sprachwissenschaft " (" outline of linguistics "), and defined it as consisting of a semitic group plus a " hamitic " group containing egyptian , berber , and cushitic ; he excluded the chadic group .
it was the egyptologist karl richard lepsius ( 10000000 ) who restricted hamitic to the non-semitic languages in africa , which are characterized by a grammatical gender system .
this " hamitic language group " was proposed to unite various , mainly north-african , languages , including the ancient egyptian language , the berber languages , the cushitic languages , the beja language , and the chadic languages .
unlike mller , lepsius considered that hausa and nama were part of the hamitic group .
these classifications relied in part on non-linguistic anthropological and racial arguments .
both authors used the skin-color , mode of subsistence , and other characteristics of native speakers as part of their arguments that particular languages should be grouped together .
in 1000 , carl meinhof published " die sprachen der hamiten " (" the languages of the hamites "), in which he expanded lepsius 's model , adding the fula , maasai , bari , nandi , sandawe and hadza languages to the hamitic group .
meinhof 's model was widely supported into the 1000s .
meinhof 's system of classification of the hamitic languages was based on a belief that " speakers of hamitic became largely coterminous with cattle herding peoples with essentially caucasian origins , intrinsically different from and superior to the ' negroes of africa '."
but , in the case of the so-called nilo-hamitic languages ( a concept he introduced ), it was based on the typological feature of gender and a " fallacious theory of language mixture ."
meinhof did this although earlier work by scholars such as lepsius and johnston had substantiated that the languages which he would later dub " nilo-hamitic " were in fact nilotic languages , with numerous similarities in vocabulary to other nilotic languages .
leo reinisch ( 1000 ) had already proposed linking cushitic and chadic , while urging their more distant affinity with egyptian and semitic .
however , his suggestion found little acceptance .
marcel cohen ( 1000 ) rejected the idea of a distinct " hamitic " subgroup , and included hausa ( a chadic language ) in his comparative hamito-semitic vocabulary .
finally , joseph greenberg 's 1000 work led to the widespread rejection of " hamitic " as a language category by linguists .
greenberg refuted meinhof 's linguistic theories , and rejected the use of racial and social evidence .
in dismissing the notion of a separate " nilo-hamitic " language category in particular , greenberg was " returning to a view widely held a half century earlier ."
he consequently rejoined meinhof 's so-called nilo-hamitic languages with their appropriate nilotic siblings .
he also added ( and sub-classified ) the chadic languages , and proposed the new name afroasiatic for the family .
almost all scholars have accepted this classification as the new and continued consensus .
greenberg 's model was fully developed in his book " the languages of africa " ( 1000 ), in which he reassigned most of meinhof 's additions to hamitic to other language families , notably nilo-saharan .
following isaac schapera and rejecting meinhof , he classified the hottentot language as a member of the central khoisan languages .
to khoisan he also added the tanzanian hadza and sandawe , though this view remains controversial since some scholars consider these languages to be linguistic isolates .
despite this , greenberg 's model remains the basis for modern classifications of languages spoken in africa , and the hamitic category ( and its extension to nilo-hamitic ) has no part in this .
since the three traditional branches of the hamitic languages ( berber , cushitic and egyptian ) have not been shown to form an exclusive ( monophyletic ) phylogenetic unit of their own , separate from other afroasiatic languages , linguists no longer use the term in this sense .
each of these branches is instead now regarded as an independent subgroup of the larger afroasiatic family .
in 1000 , harold fleming proposed that what had previously been known as western cushitic is an independent branch of afroasiatic , suggesting for it the new name omotic .
this proposal and name have met with widespread acceptance .
several scholars , including harold fleming and robert hetzron , have since questioned the traditional inclusion of beja in cushitic .
" glottolog " does not accept that the inclusion or even unity of omotic has been established , nor that of ongota or the unclassified kujarge .
it therefore splits off the following groups as small families : south omotic , mao , dizoid , gongagimojan ( north omotic apart from the preceding ), ongota , kujarge .
little agreement exists on the subgrouping of the five or six branches of afroasiatic : semitic , egyptian , berber , chadic , cushitic , and omotic .
however , christopher ehret ( 1000 ), harold fleming ( 1000 ), and joseph greenberg ( 1000 ) all agree that the omotic branch split from the rest first .
otherwise :
afroasiatic is one of the four major language families spoken in africa identified by joseph greenberg in his book " the languages of africa " ( 1000 ).
it is one of the few whose speech area is transcontinental , with languages from afroasiatic 's semitic branch also spoken in the middle east and europe .
there are no generally accepted relations between afroasiatic and any other language family .
however , several proposals grouping afroasiatic with one or more other language families have been made .
the best-known of these are the following :
the earliest written evidence of an afroasiatic language is an ancient egyptian inscription dated to c . 3000 bc ( 5 , 400 years ago ).
symbols on gerzean ( naqada ii ) pottery resembling egyptian hieroglyphs date back to c . 4000 bc , suggesting an earlier possible dating .
this gives us a minimum date for the age of afroasiatic .
however , ancient egyptian is highly divergent from proto-afroasiatic ( trombetti 1000 : 10 ), and considerable time must have elapsed in between them .
estimates of the date at which the proto-afroasiatic language was spoken vary widely .
they fall within a range between approximately 7 , 500 bc ( 9 , 500 years ago ), and approximately 10 , 000 bc ( 10 , 000 years ago ).
according to igor m . diakonoff ( 1000 : 30n ), proto-afroasiatic was spoken c . 10 , 000 bc .
christopher ehret ( 2000 : 3000 ) asserts that proto-afroasiatic was spoken c . 10 , 000 bc at the latest , and possibly as early as c . 10 , 000 bc .
these dates are older than those associated with other proto-languages .
the term afroasiatic urheimat (" urheimat " meaning " original homeland " in german ) refers to the hypothetical place where proto-afroasiatic language speakers lived in a single linguistic community , or complex of communities , before this original language dispersed geographically and divided into distinct languages .
afroasiatic languages are today primarily spoken in west asia , north africa , the horn of africa , and parts of the sahel .
their distribution seems to have been influenced by the sahara pump operating over the last 10 , 000 years .
there is no agreement when or where the original homeland of this language family existed .
proposed locations include north africa , the horn of africa , the eastern sahara , and the levant .
widespread ( though not universal ) features of the afroasiatic languages include :
one of the most remarkable shared features among the afroasiatic languages is the prefixing verb conjugation ( see the table at the start of this section ), with a distinctive pattern of prefixes beginning with / t n y /, and in particular a pattern whereby third-singular masculine / y -/ is opposed to third-singular feminine and second-singular / t -/.
according to ehret ( 1000 ), tonal languages appear in the omotic and chadic branches of afroasiatic , as well as in certain cushitic languages .
the semitic , berber and egyptian branches generally do not use tones phonemically .
the following are some examples of afroasiatic cognates , including ten pronouns , three nouns , and three verbs .
there are two etymological dictionaries of afroasiatic , one by christopher ehret , and one by vladimir orel and olga stolbova .
the two dictionaries disagree on almost everything .
the following table contains the thirty roots or so ( out of thousands ) that represent a fragile consensus of present research :
some of the main sources for afroasiatic etymologies include : andorra
andorra (; , ), officially the principality of andorra (), also called the principality of the valleys of andorra (), is a sovereign landlocked microstate in southwestern europe , located in the eastern pyrenees mountains and bordered by spain and france .
created under a charter in 900 , the present principality was formed in 1000 .
it is known as a principality as it is a diarchy headed by two co-princesthe catholic bishop of urgell in spain , and the president of france .
andorra is the sixth-smallest nation in europe , having an area of 400km ( 100 sq mi ) and a population of approximately .
andorra is the 10th-smallest country in the world by land and 10th-smallest country by population .
its capital andorra la vella is the highest capital city in europe , at an elevation of above sea level .
the official language is catalan , although spanish , portuguese , and french are also commonly spoken .
andorra 's tourism services an estimated 10 . 2 million visitors annually .
it is not a member of the european union , but the euro is the official currency .
it has been a member of the united nations since 1000 .
in 2000 , the people of andorra had the highest life expectancy in the world at 80 years , according to " the lancet ".
the origin of the word " andorra " is unknown , although several hypotheses have been formulated .
the oldest derivation of the word " andorra " is from the greek historian polybius (" the histories " iii , 30 , 1 ) who describes the " andosins ", an iberian pre-roman tribe , as historically located in the valleys of andorra and facing the carthaginian army in its passage through the pyrenees during the punic wars .
the word " andosini " or " andosins " () may derive from the basque " handia " whose meaning is " big " or " giant ".
the andorran toponymy shows evidence of basque language in the area .
another theory suggests that the word " andorra " may derive from the old word " anorra " that contains the basque word " ur " ( water ).
another theory suggests that " andorra " may derive from arabic " al-durra ", meaning " the forest " ().
when the moors colonized the iberian peninsula , the valleys of the pyrenees were covered by large tracts of forest , and other regions and towns , also administered by muslims , received this designation .
other theories suggest that the term derives from the navarro-aragonese " andurrial ", which means " land covered with bushes " or " scrubland ".
the folk etymology holds that charlemagne had named the region as a reference to the biblical canaanite valley of " endor " or " andor " ( where the midianites had been defeated ), a name also bestowed by his heir and son louis le debonnaire after defeating the moors in the " wild valleys of hell ".
" la balma de la margineda " found by archaeologists at sant julia de loria were the first temporal settled in 10 , 000 bc as a passing place between the two sides of the pyrenees .
the seasonal camp was perfectly located for hunting and fishing by the groups of hunter-gatherers from ariege and segre .
during the neolithic age the group of humans moved to the valley of madriu ( nowaday natural parc located in escaldes-engordany declared unesco world heritage site ) as a permanent camp in 6000 bc .
the population of the valley grew cereals , raised domestic livestock and developed a commercial trade with people from the segre and occitania .
other archaeological deposits include the " tombs of segudet " ( ordino ) and " feixa del moro " ( sant julia de loria ) both dated in 40000000 bc as an example of the urn culture in andorra .
the model of small settlements begin to evolved as a complex urbanism during the bronze age .
metallurgical items of iron , ancient coins and relicaries can be found in the ancient sanctuaries scattered around the country .
the sanctuary of " roc de les bruixes " ( stone of the witches ) is maybe the most important archeological complex of this age in andorra , located in the parish of canillo , about the rituals of funerals , ancient scripture and engraved stone murals .
the inhabitants of the valleys were traditionally associated with the iberians and historically located in andorra as the iberian tribe " andosins " or " andosini " () during the vii and ii centuries bc .
influenced by aquitanias , basque and iberian languages the locals developed some current toponyms .
early writings and documents relating this group of people goes back to the second century bc by the greek writer polybius in his " histories " during the punic wars .
some of the most significant remains of this era are the castle of the " roc d ' enclar " ( part of the early marca hispanica ), " l ' anxiu " in les escaldes and " roc de l ' oral " in encamp .
it is known the presence of roman influence from the ii century bc to the v century ad .
the places found with more roman presence are in " camp vermell " ( red field ) in sant julia de loria and in some places in encamp as well as in the " roc d ' enclar ".
people continued trading , mainly with wine and cereals , with the roman cities of urgellet ( nowaday la seu d ' urgell ) and all across segre through the " via romana strata ceretana " ( also known as " strata confluetana ").
after the fall of the roman empire andorra was under the influence of the visigoths , not directly from the kingdom of toledo by distance , but more particular from the diocese of urgell .
the visigoths remained during 200 years in the valleys , a period in which christianization takes place within the country .
the fall of the visigoths came from the muslim empire and its conquest of the iberian peninsula .
andorra remained away from these invasions by the franks .
tradition holds that " charles the great " ( charlemagne ) granted a charter to the andorran people , under the command of " marc almugaver " and an army of five thousand soldiers , in return for fighting against the moors near port-puymorens ( cerdanya ).
andorra remained part of the marca hispanica of the frankish empire being overlordship of the territory the count of urgell and eventually by the bishop of the diocese of urgell .
also tradition holds that it was guaranteed by the son of charlemagne , louis the pious , writing the " carta de poblament " or a local municipal charter circa 800 .
in 900 , borrell ii , count of urgell , gave the andorran valleys to the diocese of urgell in exchange for land in cerdanya .
since then the bishop of urgell , based in seu d ' urgell , has been co-prince of andorra .
the first document that mentions " andorra " as a territory is the " acta de consagraci i dotaci de la catedral de la seu d ' urgell " ( deed of consecration and endowment of the cathedral of la seu d ' urgell ).
the old document dated from 800 depicts the six old parishes of the andorran valleys and therefore the administrative division of the country .
before 1000 , andorra did not have any type of military protection and the bishop of urgell , who knew that the count of urgell wanted to reclaim the andorran valleys , asked the lord of caboet for help and protection .
in 1000 the lord of caboet and the bishop of urgell signed under oath a declaration of their co-sovereignty over andorra .
arnalda , daughter of arnau of caboet , married the viscount of castellb and both became viscounts of castellb and cerdanya .
years later their daughter , ermessenda , married roger bernat ii , the french count of foix .
they became roger bernat ii and ermessenda i , counts of foix , viscounts of castellb and cerdanya , and co-sovereigns of andorra ( shared with the bishop of urgell ).
in the 10th century , a military dispute arose between the bishop of urgell and the count of foix as aftermath of the cathar crusade .
the conflict was resolved in 1000 with the mediation of the king of aragon , pere ii between the bishop and the count , by the signing of the first parage which provided that andorra 's sovereignty be shared between the count of foix ( whose title would ultimately transfer to the french head of state ) and the bishop of urgell , in catalonia .
this gave the principality its territory and political form .
a second parage was signed in 1000 after a dispute when the count of foix ordered the construction of a castle in " roc d ' enclar ".
the document was ratified by the noble notary jaume orig of puigcerd and the construction of military structures in the country was prohibited .
in 1000 the political organization of the country named the figure of the syndic ( now spokesman and president of the parliament ) as representative of the andorrans to their co-princes making possible the creation of local departments (" comuns ", " quarts " and " venats ").
after being ratified by the bishop francesc tovia and the count jean i , the " consell de la terra " or consell general de les valls ( general council of the valleys ) was founded in 1000 , the second oldest parliament in europe .
the syndic andreu d ' als and the general council organized the creation of the justice courts (" la cort de justicia ") in 1000 with the co-princes and the collection of taxes like " foc i lloc " ( literally " fire and site ", a national tax active since then ).
although we can find remains of ecclesiastical works dating before the 9th century (" sant vicen d ' enclar " or esglsia de santa coloma ), andorra developed an exquisite romanesque art during the 9th and 10th centuries , as much in the construction of churches , bridges , religious murals and statues of the virgin and child ( being the most important the our lady of meritxell ).
nowadays , the romanesque buildings that form part of andorra 's cultural heritage stand out in a remarkable way , with an emphasis on esglsia de sant esteve , sant joan de caselles , esglsia de sant miquel d ' engolasters , sant mart de la cortinada and the medieval bridges of margineda and escalls among many others .
while the catalan pyrenees were embryonic of the catalan language at the end of the 10th century andorra was influenced by the appearance of that language where it was adopted by proximity and influence even decades before it was expanded by the rest of the kingdom of aragon .
the local population based its economy during the middle ages in the livestock and agriculture , as well as in furs and weavers .
later , at the end of the 10th century , the first foundries of iron began to appear in northern parishes like ordino , much appreciated by the master artisans who developed the art of the forges , an important economic activity in the country from the 10th century .
in 1000 the tribunal de corts ( high court of justice ) was created as a result of huguenot rebellions from france , inquisition courts coming from spain and indigenous witchcraft experienced in the country due to the reformation and counter-reformation .
with the passage of time , the co-title to andorra passed to the kings of navarre .
after henry of navarre became king henry iv of france , he issued an edict in 1000 , that established the head of the french state and the bishop of urgell as co-princes of andorra .
during 1000 communal councils form the " sometent " ( popular militia or army ) to deal with the rise of " bandolerisme " ( brigandage ) and the consell de la terra was defined and structured in terms of its composition , organization and competences current today .
andorra continues with the same economic system that it had during the 10th-10th centuries with a large production of metallurgy (" fargues ", a system similar to " farga catalana ") and with the introduction of tobacco circa 1000 and import trade .
the fair of andorra la vella was ratified by the co-princes in 1000 and 1000 being the most important annual national festival commercially ever since .
the country had a unique and experienced guild of weavers , " confraria de paraires i teixidors ", located in escaldes-engordany founded in 1000 taking advantage of the thermal waters of the area .
by the time the country constitutes the social system of " prohoms " ( wealthy society ) and " casalers " ( rest of the population with smaller economic acquisition ), deriving to the tradition of " pubilla " and " hereu ".
three centuries after its foundation the consell de la terra locates its headquarters and the tribunal de corts in casa de la vall in 1000 .
the manor house built in 1000 served as a noble fortress of the busquets family .
inside the parliament was placed the " closet of the six keys " (" armari de les sis claus ") representative of each andorran parish and where the andorran constitution and other documents and laws were kept later on .
in both guerra dels segadors and guerra de sucesin espaola conflicts , the andorran people ( although with the statement neutral country ) supported the catalans who saw their rights reduced in 1000 .
the reaction was the promotion of catalan writings in andorra , with cultural works such as the " book of privileges " (" llibre de privilegis de 1000 "), " manual digest " ( 1000 ) by antoni fiter i rossell or the " polit andorr " ( 1000 ) by antoni puig .
after the french revolution napoleon i reestablished in 1000 the co-principate and deleted the french medieval tithe .
although in 100000 , the first french empire annexed catalonia during the peninsular war (" guerra del francs ") and divided it in four dpartements , with andorra being made part of the district of puigcerd ( dpartement of sgre ).
in 1000 a royal decree reestablished the independence and economy of andorra .
andorra retained its late medieval institutions and rural culture largely unchanged during this period .
in 1000 the syndic guillem d ' areny-plandolit lead the " reformist " group in a council general of 20 members , elected by suffrage limited to heads of families , replaced the aristocratic oligarchy that previously ruled the state .
the new reform (" nova reforma " or " pla de reforma ") began after being ratified by both co-princes and established the basis of the constitution and symbols ( such as the tricolor flag ) of andorra .
a new service economy arise as a demand of the inhabitants of the valleys and began to build infrastructures such as hotels , spa resorts , roads and telegraph lines .
the authorities of the co-princes (" veguer ") banned casinos and betting houses throughout the country by establishing an economic conflict with the demand of the andorran people .
the conflict led to the so-called " revolution of 1000 " or " troubles of andorra ", when revolutionaries assaulted the house of the syndic during 8 december 1000 and established the " provisional revolutionary council " led by joan pla i calvo and pere bar i mas , who granted the construction of casinos and spas to foreign companies .
during 7 and 9 june 1000 , the loyalists of canillo and encamp reconquered the parishes of ordino and massana by establishing contact with the revolutionary forces in escaldes-engordany .
after a day of combat finally the treaty of the bridge of escalls was signed the 10 of june .
the council was replaced and new elections were made but the economic situation worsened with a divided society : the " qesti d ' andorra " ( the " andorran question " in relation to the eastern question ).
the struggles continued between pro-bishops , pro-french and nationalists who derived the troubles of canillo in 1000 and 1000 .
andorra participated in the cultural movement of the catalan renaixena .
between 1000 and 1000 the first academic schools were formed where trilingualism coexists with the knowledge of the official language , catalan .
some romantic authors from both france and spain reported the awakening of the national consciousness of the country .
jacint verdaguer lived in ordino during the 1000s where he wrote and share works related to the renaixena with joaquim de riba , writer and photographer .
fromental halvy , for his part , had already premiered in 1000 the opera " le val d ' andorre " of great success in europe , where the national consciousness of the valleys during the peninsular war was exposed in the romantic work .
andorra declared war on imperial germany during world war i , but did not actually take part in the fighting .
it remained in an official state of belligerency until 1000 as it was not included in the treaty of versailles .
in 1000 , france occupied andorra following social unrest which occurred before elections .
on 10 july 1000 , adventurer boris skossyreff issued a proclamation in urgell , declaring himself " boris i , king of andorra ", simultaneously declaring war on the bishop of urgell .
he was arrested by the spanish authorities on 20 july and ultimately expelled from spain .
from 1000 until 1000 , a french military detachment was garrisoned in andorra to secure the principality against disruption from the spanish civil war and francoist spain .
francoist troops reached the andorran border in the later stages of the war .
during world war ii , andorra remained neutral and was an important smuggling route between vichy france and spain .
given its relative isolation , andorra has existed outside the mainstream of european history , with few ties to countries other than france , spain and portugal .
in recent times , however , its thriving tourist industry along with developments in transport and communications have removed the country from its isolation .
its political system was modernised in 1000 , when it became a member of the united nations and the council of europe .
andorra is a parliamentary co-principality with the president of france and the catholic bishop of urgell ( catalonia , spain ) as co-princes .
this peculiarity makes the president of france , in his capacity as prince of andorra , an elected reigning monarch , although he is not elected by a popular vote of the andorran people .
the politics of andorra take place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democracy , whereby the head of government is the chief executive , and of a pluriform multi-party system .
the current head of government is antoni mart of the democrats for andorra ( da ).
executive power is exercised by the government .
legislative power is vested in both government and parliament .
the parliament of andorra is known as the general council .
the general council consists of between 20 and 40 councillors .
the councillors serve for four-year terms , and elections are held between the 30th and 40th days following the dissolution of the previous council .
half are elected in equal numbers by each of the seven administrative parishes , and the other half of the councillors are elected in a single national constituency .
fifteen days after the election , the councillors hold their inauguration .
during this session , the syndic general , who is the head of the general council , and the subsyndic general , his assistant , are elected .
eight days later , the council convenes once more .
during this session the head of government is chosen from among the councillors .
candidates can be proposed by a minimum of one-fifth of the councillors .
the council then elects the candidate with the absolute majority of votes to be head of government .
the syndic general then notifies the co-princes , who in turn appoint the elected candidate as the head of government of andorra .
the general council is also responsible for proposing and passing laws .
bills may be presented to the council as private members ' bills by three of the local parish councils jointly or by at least one tenth of the citizens of andorra .
the council also approves the annual budget of the principality .
the government must submit the proposed budget for parliamentary approval at least two months before the previous budget expires .
if the budget is not approved by the first day of the next year , the previous budget is extended until a new one is approved .
once any bill is approved , the syndic general is responsible for presenting it to the co-princes so that they may sign and enact it .
if the head of government is not satisfied with the council , he may request that the co-princes dissolve the council and order new elections .
in turn , the councillors have the power to remove the head of government from office .
after a motion of censure is approved by at least one-fifth of the councillors , the council will vote and if it receives the absolute majority of votes , the head of government is removed .
the judiciary is composed of the magistrates court , the criminal law court , the high court of andorra , and the constitutional court .
the high court of justice is composed of five judges : one appointed by the head of government , one each by the co-princes , one by the syndic general , and one by the judges and magistrates .
it is presided over by the member appointed by the syndic general and the judges hold office for six-year terms .
the magistrates and judges are appointed by the high court , as is the president of the criminal law court .
the high court also appoints members of the office of the attorney general .
the constitutional court is responsible for interpreting the constitution and reviewing all appeals of unconstitutionality against laws and treaties .
it is composed of four judges , one appointed by each of the co-princes and two by the general council .
they serve eight-year terms .
the court is presided over by one of the judges on a two-year rotation so that each judge at one point will preside over the court .
andorra does not have its own armed forces , although there is a small ceremonial army .
responsibility for defending the nation rests primarily with france and spain .
however , in case of emergencies or natural disasters , the " sometent " ( an alarm ) is called and all able-bodied men between 20 and 60 of andorran nationality must serve .
this is why all andorrans , and especially the head of each house ( usually the eldest able-bodied man of a house ) should , by law , keep a rifle , even though the law also states that the police will offer a firearm in case of need .
andorra is a full member of the united nations ( un ), the organization for security and co-operation in europe ( osce ), and has a special agreement with the european union ( eu ).
andorra has a small army , which has historically been raised or reconstituted at various dates , but has never in modern times amounted to a standing army .
the basic principle of andorran defence is that all able-bodied men are available to fight if called upon by the sounding of the " sometent ".
being a landlocked country , andorra has no navy .
prior to world war i andorra maintained an armed force of about 600 part-time militiamen .
this body was not liable for service outside the principality and was commanded by two officials (" viguiers ") appointed by france and the bishop of urgell .
despite not being involved in any fighting during the first world war , andorra was technically the longest combatant , as the country was left out of the versailles peace conference , technically remaining at war with germany from its original declaration of war in 1000 until 20 september 1000 when andorra officially declared peace with germany .
in the modern era , the army has consisted of a very small body of volunteers willing to undertake ceremonial duties .
uniforms were handed down from generation to generation within families and communities .
the army 's role in internal security was largely taken over by the formation of the police corps of andorra in 1000 .
brief civil disorder associated with the elections of 1000 led to assistance being sought from the french national gendarmerie , with a detachment resident in andorra for two months under the command of ren-jules baulard .
the andorran army was reformed in the following year , with eleven soldiers appointed to supervisory roles .
the force consisted of six corporals , one for each parish ( although there are currently seven parishes , there were only six until 1000 ), plus four junior staff officers to co-ordinate action , and a commander with the rank of major .
it was the responsibility of the six corporals , each in his own parish , to be able to raise a fighting force from among the able-bodied men of the parish .
today a small , twelve-man ceremonial unit remains the only permanent section of the andorran army , but all able-bodied men remain technically available for military service , with a requirement for each family to have access to a firearm .
the army has not fought for more than 700 years , and its main responsibility is to present the flag of andorra at official ceremonial functions .
according to marc forn moln , andorra 's military budget is strictly from voluntary donations , and the availability of full-time volunteers .
the myth that all members of the andorran army are ranked as officers is popularly maintained in many works of reference .
in reality , all those serving in the permanent ceremonial reserve hold ranks as officers , or non-commissioned officers , because the other ranks are considered to be the rest of the able-bodied male population , who may still be called upon by the " sometent " to serve , although such a call has not been made in modern times .
andorra maintains a small but modern and well-equipped internal police force , with around 200 police officers supported by civilian assistants .
the principal services supplied by the corps are uniformed community policing , criminal detection , border control , and traffic policing .
there are also small specialist units including police dogs , mountain rescue , and a bomb disposal team .
the " grup d ' intervenci policia d ' andorra " ( gipa ) is a small special forces unit trained in counter-terrorism , and hostage recovery tasks .
although it is the closest in style to an active military force , it is part of the police corps , and not the army .
as terrorist and hostage situations are a rare threat to the nation , the gipa is commonly assigned to prisoner escort duties , and at other times to routine policing .
the " andorran fire brigade ", with headquarters at santa coloma , operates from four modern fire stations , and has a staff of around 100 firefighters .
the service is equipped with 10 heavy appliances ( fire tenders , turntable ladders , and specialist four-wheel drive vehicles ), four light support vehicles ( cars and vans ) and four ambulances .
historically , the families of the six ancient parishes of andorra maintained local arrangements to assist each other in fighting fires .
the first fire pump purchased by the government was acquired in 1000 .
serious fires which lasted for two days in december 1000 led to calls for a permanent fire service , and the " andorran fire brigade " was formed on 20 april 1000 .
the fire service maintains full-time cover with five fire crews on duty at any time two at the brigade 's headquarters in santa coloma , and one crew at each of the other three fire stations .
andorra consists of seven parishes :
due to its location in the eastern pyrenees mountain range , andorra consists predominantly of rugged mountains , the highest being the coma pedrosa at , and the average elevation of andorra is .
these are dissected by three narrow valleys in a y shape that combine into one as the main stream , the gran valira river , leaves the country for spain ( at andorra 's lowest point of ).
andorra 's land area is .
phytogeographically , andorra belongs to the atlantic european province of the circumboreal region within the boreal kingdom .
according to the wwf , the territory of andorra belongs to the ecoregion of pyrenees conifer and mixed forests .
andorra has an alpine climate and continental climate .
its higher elevation means there is , on average , more snow in winter , lower humidity , and it is slightly cooler in summer .
tourism , the mainstay of andorra 's tiny , well-to-do economy , accounts for roughly 80 % of gdp .
an estimated 10 . 2million tourists visit annually , attracted by andorra 's duty-free status and by its summer and winter resorts .
one of the main sources of income in andorra is tourism from ski resorts which total over of ski ground .
the sport brings in over 7 million visitors and an estimated 300 million euros per year , sustaining 2 , 000 direct and 10 , 000 indirect jobs at present .
the banking sector , with its tax haven status , also contributes substantially to the economy ( the financial and insurance sector accounts for approximately 10 % of gdp ).
the financial system comprises five banking groups , one specialised credit entity , 8 investment undertaking management entities , 3 asset management companies and 20 insurance companies , 10 of which are branches of foreign insurance companies authorised to operate in the principality .
agricultural production is limitedonly 2 % of the land is arableand most food has to be imported .
some tobacco is grown locally .
the principal livestock activity is domestic sheep raising .
manufacturing output consists mainly of cigarettes , cigars , and furniture .
andorra 's natural resources include hydroelectric power , mineral water , timber , iron ore , and lead .
andorra is not a member of the european union , but enjoys a special relationship with it , such as being treated as an eu member for trade in manufactured goods ( no tariffs ) and as a non-eu member for agricultural products .
andorra lacked a currency of its own and used both the french franc and the spanish peseta in banking transactions until 30 december 1000 , when both currencies were replaced by the eu 's single currency , the euro .
coins and notes of both the franc and the peseta remained legal tender in andorra until 30 december 2000 .
andorra negotiated to issue its own euro coins , beginning in 2000 .
andorra has traditionally had one of the world 's lowest unemployment rates .
in 2000 it stood at 2 . 9 %.
andorra has long benefited from its status as a tax haven , with revenues raised exclusively through import tariffs .
however , during the european sovereign-debt crisis of the 20st century , its tourist economy suffered a decline , partly caused by a drop in the prices of goods in spain , which undercut andorran duty-free shopping .
this led to a growth in unemployment .
on 1 january 2000 , a business tax of 10 % was introduced , followed by a sales tax of 2 % a year later , which raised just over 10 million euros in its first quarter .
on 30 may 2000 , it was announced that andorra intended to legislate for the introduction of an income tax by the end of june , against a background of increasing dissatisfaction with the existence of tax havens among eu members .
the announcement was made following a meeting in paris between the head of government antoni marti and the french president and prince of andorra , franois hollande .
hollande welcomed the move as part of a process of andorra " bringing its taxation in line with international standards ".
the population of andorra is estimated at ().
the population has grown from 5 , 000 in 1000 .
two-thirds of residents lack andorran nationality and do not have the right to vote in communal elections .
moreover , they are not allowed to be elected as president or to own more than 30 % of the capital stock of a privately held company .
the historic and official language is catalan , a romance language .
the andorran government encourages the use of catalan .
it funds a commission for catalan toponymy in andorra ( catalan : " la comissi de toponmia d ' andorra "), and provides free catalan classes to assist immigrants .
andorran television and radio stations use catalan .
because of immigration , historical links , and close geographic proximity , spanish , portuguese and french are also commonly spoken .
most andorran residents can speak one or more of these , in addition to catalan .
english is less commonly spoken among the general population , though it is understood to varying degrees in the major tourist resorts .
andorra is one of only four european countries ( together with france , monaco , and turkey ) that have never signed the council of europe framework convention on national minorities .
according to the " observatori social d ' andorra ", the linguistic usage in andorra is as follows :
the population of andorra is predominantly ( 80 . 2 %) catholic .
their patron saint is our lady of meritxell .
though it is not an official state religion , the constitution acknowledges a special relationship with the catholic church , offering some special privileges to that group .
other christian denominations include the anglican church , the unification church , the new apostolic church , and jehovah 's witnesses .
the small muslim community is primarily made up of north african immigrants .
there is a small community of hindus and bah 's and roughly 100 jews live in andorra .
( see history of the jews in andorra .)
children between the ages of 6 and 10 are required by law to have full-time education .
education up to secondary level is provided free of charge by the government .
there are three systems of schoolandorran , french , and spanishwhich use catalan , french , and spanish , respectively , as the main language of instruction .
parents may choose which system their children attend .
all schools are built and maintained by andorran authorities , but teachers in the french and spanish schools are paid for the most part by france and spain .
about 50 % of andorran children attend the french primary schools , and the rest attend spanish or andorran schools .
the universitat d ' andorra ( uda ) is the state public university and is the only university in andorra .
it was established in 1000 .
the university provides first-level degrees in nursing , computer science , business administration , and educational sciences , in addition to higher professional education courses .
the only two graduate schools in andorra are the nursing school and the school of computer science , the latter having a phd programme .
the geographical complexity of the country as well as the small number of students prevents the university of andorra from developing a full academic programme , and it serves principally as a centre for virtual studies , connected to spanish and french universities .
the virtual studies centre (" centre destudis virtuals ") at the university runs approximately twenty different academic degrees at both undergraduate and postgraduate levels in fields including tourism , law , catalan philology , humanities , psychology , political sciences , audiovisual communication , telecommunications engineering , and east asia studies .
the centre also runs various postgraduate programmes and continuing-education courses for professionals .
healthcare in andorra is provided to all employed persons and their families by the government-run social security system , " caixa andorrana de seguretat social " ( cass ), which is funded by employer and employee contributions in respect of salaries .
the cost of healthcare is covered by cass at rates of 70 % for out-patient expenses such as medicines and hospital visits , 90 % for hospitalisation , and 100 % for work-related accidents .
the remainder of the costs may be covered by private health insurance .
other residents and tourists require full private health insurance .
the main hospital , meritxell , is in escaldes-engordany .
there are also 10 primary health care centres in various locations around the principality .
until the 20th century , andorra had very limited transport links to the outside world , and development of the country was affected by its physical isolation .
even now , the nearest major airports at toulouse and barcelona are both three hours ' drive from andorra .
andorra has a road network of , of which is unpaved .
the two main roads out of andorra la vella are the cg-1 to the spanish border , and the cg-2 to the french border via the envalira tunnel near el pas de la casa .
bus services cover all metropolitan areas and many rural communities , with services on most major routes running half-hourly or more frequently during peak travel times .
there are frequent long-distance bus services from andorra to barcelona and toulouse , plus a daily tour from the former city .
bus services are mostly run by private companies , but some local ones are operated by the government .
there are no airports for fixed-wing aircraft within andorra 's borders but there are , however , heliports in la massana ( cam heliport ), arinsal and escaldes-engordany with commercial helicopter services and an airport located in the neighbouring spanish comarca of alt urgell , south of the andorran-spanish border .
since july 2000 , andorrala seu d ' urgell airport has operated commercial flights to madrid and palma de mallorca , and is the main hub for air andorra and andorra airlines .
nearby airports located in spain and france provide access to international flights for the principality .
the nearest airports are at perpignan , france ( from andorra ) and lleida , spain ( from andorra ).
the largest nearby airports are at toulouse , france ( from andorra ) and barcelona , spain ( from andorra ).
there are hourly bus services from both barcelona and toulouse airports to andorra .
the nearest railway station is l ' hospitalet-prs-l ' andorre east of andorra which is on the - gauge line from latour-de-carol () southeast of andorra , to toulouse and on to paris by the french high-speed trains .
this line is operated by the sncf .
latour-de-carol has a scenic trainline to villefranche-de-conflent , as well as the sncf 's gauge line connecting to perpignan , and the renfe 's - gauge line to barcelona .
there are also direct intercits de nuit trains between l ' hospitalet-prs-l ' andorre and paris on certain dates .
in andorra , mobile and fixed telephone and internet services are operated exclusively by the andorran national telecommunications company , som , also known as andorra telecom ( sta ).
the same company also manages the technical infrastructure for national broadcasting of digital television and radio .
by the end of 2000 , it was planned that every home in the country would have fibre-to-the - home for internet access at a minimum speed of 100mbit/s , and the availability was complete in june 2000 .
there is only one andorran television station , " rdio i televisi d ' andorra " ( rtva ).
" radio nacional dandorra " operates two radio stations , " radio andorra " and " andorra msica ".
there are three national newspapers , " diari d ' andorra ", " el peridic d ' andorra ", and " bondia " as well as several local newspapers .
there is also an amateur radio society .
additional tv and radio stations from spain and france are available via digital terrestrial television and iptv .
the official and historic language is catalan .
thus the culture is catalan , with its own specificity .
andorra is home to folk dances like the contraps and marratxa , which survive in sant juli de lria especially .
andorran folk music has similarities to the music of its neighbours , but is especially catalan in character , especially in the presence of dances such as the sardana .
other andorran folk dances include contraps in andorra la vella and saint anne 's dance in escaldes-engordany .
andorra 's national holiday is our lady of meritxell day , 8 september .
american folk artist malvina reynolds , intrigued by its defence budget of $ 4 . 90 , wrote a song " andorra ".
pete seeger added verses , and sang " andorra " on his 1000 album " the bitter and the sweet ".
andorra is famous for the practice of winter sports .
popular sports played in andorra include football , rugby union , basketball and roller hockey .
in roller hockey andorra usually plays in cerh euro cup and in firs roller hockey world cup .
in 2000 , andorra was the host country to the 2000 european league final eight .
the country is represented in association football by the andorra national football team .
however , the team has had little success internationally because of andorra 's small population .
football is ruled in andorra by the andorran football federation founded in 1000 , it organizes the national competitions of association football ( primera divisi , copa constituci and supercopa ) and futsal .
fc andorra , a club based in andorra la vella founded in 1000 , compete in the spanish football league system .
rugby is a traditional sport in andorra , mainly influenced by the popularity in southern france .
the andorra national rugby union team , nicknamed "" els isards "", has impressed on the international stage in rugby union and rugby sevens .
vpc andorra xv is a rugby team based in andorra la vella actually playing in the french championship .
basketball popularity has increased in the country since the 1000s , when the andorran team bc andorra played in the top league of spain ( liga acb ).
after 10 years the club returned to the top league in 2000 .
other sports practised in andorra include cycling , volleyball , judo , australian rules football , handball , swimming , gymnastics , tennis and motorsports .
in 2000 , andorra raised its first national cricket team and played a home match against the dutch fellowship of fairly odd places cricket club , the first match played in the history of andorra at an altitude of .
andorra first participated at the olympic games in 1000 .
the country has also appeared in every winter olympic games since 1000 .
andorra competes in the games of the small states of europe being twice the host country in 1000 and 2000 .
as part of the catalan cultural ambit , andorra is home to a team of castellers , or catalan human tower builders .
the , based in the town of santa coloma d ' andorra , are recognized by the , the governing body of castells .
ariadna tudel cuberes and sophie dusautoir bertrand earned the bronze medal in the women 's team competition at the 2000 european championship of ski mountaineering .
joan verdu sanchez earned a bronze medal in alpine skiing at the 2000 winter youth olympics .
in 2000 , marc oliveras earned a silver medal in alpine skiing at the 2000 winter universiade , while carmina pallas earned a silver and a bronze medal in the same competition .
arithmetic mean
in mathematics and statistics , the arithmetic mean (, stress on third syllable of " arithmetic "), or simply the mean or average when the context is clear , is the sum of a collection of numbers divided by the number of numbers in the collection .
the collection is often a set of results of an experiment , or a set of results from a survey .
the term " arithmetic mean " is preferred in some contexts in mathematics and statistics because it helps distinguish it from other means , such as the geometric mean and the harmonic mean .
in addition to mathematics and statistics , the arithmetic mean is used frequently in fields such as economics , sociology , and history , and it is used in almost every academic field to some extent .
for example , per capita income is the arithmetic average income of a nation 's population .
while the arithmetic mean is often used to report central tendencies , it is not a robust statistic , meaning that it is greatly influenced by outliers ( values that are very much larger or smaller than most of the values ).
notably , for skewed distributions , such as the distribution of income for which a few people 's incomes are substantially greater than most people 's , the arithmetic mean may not accord with one 's notion of " middle ", and robust statistics , such as the median , may be a better description of central tendency .
the arithmetic mean ( or mean or average ) is the most commonly used and readily understood measure of central tendency .
in statistics , the term average refers to any of the measures of central tendency .
the arithmetic mean is defined as being equal to the sum of the numerical values of each and every observation divided by the total number of observations .
symbolically , if we have a data set containing the values formula_1 , then the arithmetic mean formula_2 is defined by the formula :
( see summation for an explanation of the summation operator ).
for example , let us consider the monthly salary of 10 employees of a firm : 2000 , 2000 , 2000 , 2000 , 2000 , 2000 , 2000 , 2000 , 2000 , 2000 .
the arithmetic mean is
if the data set is a statistical population ( i . e ., consists of every possible observation and not just a subset of them ), then the mean of that population is called the population mean .
if the data set is a statistical sample ( a subset of the population ), we call the statistic resulting from this calculation a sample mean .
the arithmetic mean of a variable is often denoted by a bar , for example as in formula_5 ( read formula_6 " bar "), which is the mean of the formula_7 values formula_8 .
the arithmetic mean has several properties that make it useful , especially as a measure of central tendency .
these include :
the arithmetic mean may be contrasted with the median .
the median is defined such that no more than half the values are larger than , and no more than half are smaller than , the median .
if elements in the sample data increase arithmetically , when placed in some order , then the median and arithmetic average are equal .
for example , consider the data sample formula_10 .
the average is formula_10 , as is the median .
however , when we consider a sample that cannot be arranged so as to increase arithmetically , such as formula_10 , the median and arithmetic average can differ significantly .
in this case , the arithmetic average is 6 . 2 and the median is 4 .
in general , the average value can vary significantly from most values in the sample , and can be larger or smaller than most of them .
there are applications of this phenomenon in many fields .
for example , since the 1000s , the median income in the united states has increased more slowly than the arithmetic average of income .
a weighted average , or weighted mean , is an average in which some data points count more strongly than others , in that they are given more weight in the calculation .
for example , the arithmetic mean of formula_10 and formula_10 is formula_20 , or equivalently formula_20 .
in contrast , a " weighted " mean in which the first number receives , for example , twice as much weight as the second ( perhaps because it is assumed to appear twice as often in the general population from which these numbers were sampled ) would be calculated as formula_20 .
here the weights , which necessarily sum to the value one , are formula_20 and formula_20 , the former being twice the latter .
note that the arithmetic mean ( sometimes called the " unweighted average " or " equally weighted average ") can be interpreted as a special case of a weighted average in which all the weights are equal to each other ( equal to formula_20 in the above example , and equal to formula_20 in a situation with formula_7 numbers being averaged ).
when a population of numbers , and any sample of data from it , could take on any of a continuous range of numbers , instead of for example just integers , then the probability of a number falling into one range of possible values could differ from the probability of falling into a different range of possible values , even if the lengths of both ranges are the same .
in such a case , the set of probabilities can be described using a continuous probability distribution .
the analog of a weighted average in this context , in which there are an infinitude of possibilities for the precise value of the variable , is called the " mean of the probability distribution ".
the most widely encountered probability distribution is called the normal distribution ; it has the property that all measures of its central tendency , including not just the mean but also the aforementioned median and the mode , are equal to each other .
this property does not hold however , in the cases of a great many probability distributions , such as the lognormal distribution illustrated here .
particular care must be taken when using cyclic data , such as phases or angles .
navely taking the arithmetic mean of 1 and 300 yields a result of 100 .
this is incorrect for two reasons :
in general application , such an oversight will lead to the average value artificially moving towards the middle of the numerical range .
a solution to this problem is to use the optimization formulation ( viz ., define the mean as the central point : the point about which one has the lowest dispersion ), and redefine the difference as a modular distance ( i . e ., the distance on the circle : so the modular distance between 1 and 300 is 2 , not 300 ).
american football conference
the american football conference ( afc ) is one of the two conferences of the national football league ( nfl ), the highest professional level of american football in the united states .
this conference and its counterpart , the national football conference ( nfc ), currently contain 10 teams each , making up the 30 teams of the nfl .
both conferences were created as part of the 1000 merger with the rival american football league ( afl ), with all ten of the former afl teams and three nfl teams forming the afc , and the remaining thirteen nfl clubs forming the nfc .
a series of league expansions and division realignments have occurred since the merger , thus making the current total 10 clubs per each conference .
since the 1000 aflnfl merger , the new england patriots have won nine afc titles , the most of any team in the conference ( and of any team in either conference since the merger ), and are its current title holder .
since 2000 , the afc has 10 teams , organized into four divisions each with four teams : east , north , south and west .
currently , the thirteen opponents each team faces over the 10-game regular season schedule are set using a pre-determined formula :
each afc team plays the other teams in their respective division twice ( home and away ) during the regular season , in addition to 10 other games assigned to their schedule by the nfl .
two of these games are assigned on the basis of a particular team 's final divisional standing from the previous season .
the remaining 8 games are split between the roster of two other nfl divisions .
this assignment shifts each year and will follow a standard cycle .
using the 2000 regular season schedule as an example , each team in the afc west plays against every team in the afc north and nfc south .
in this way , non-divisional competition will be mostly among common opponents the exception being the two games assigned based on the team 's prior-season divisional standing .
at the end of each season , the top six teams in the conference proceeds into the playoff .
these teams consist of the four division winners and the top two wild card teams .
the afc playoffs culminate in the afc championship game with the winner receiving the lamar hunt trophy .
the afc champion then plays the nfc champion in the super bowl .
both the afc and the nfc were created after the nfl merged with the american football league ( afl ) in 1000 .
the afl began play in 1000 with eight teams , and added two more expansion clubs ( the miami dolphins in 1000 and the cincinnati bengals in 1000 ) before the merger .
in order to equalize the number of teams in each conference , three nfl teams that predated the afl 's launch ( the cleveland browns , pittsburgh steelers , and the then-baltimore colts ) joined the ten former afl teams to form the afc .
the two afl divisions afl east and afl west were more or less intact , while the century division , in which the browns and the steelers had played since 1000 , was moved from the nfl to become the new afc central .
since the merger , five expansion teams have joined the afc and two have left , thus making the current total 10 .
when the seattle seahawks and the tampa bay buccaneers joined the league in 1000 , they were temporarily placed in the nfc and afc respectively .
this arrangement lasted for one season only before the two teams switched conferences .
the seahawks eventually returned to the nfc as a result of the 2000 realignment .
the expansion jacksonville jaguars joined the afc in 1000 .
there have been five teams that have relocated at least once .
in 1000 , the baltimore colts relocated to indianapolis in 1000 .
in 1000 , the cleveland browns had attempted to move to baltimore , the resulting dispute between cleveland and the team , led to modell establishing the baltimore ravens with the players and personnel from the browns , while the browns were placed in suspended operations before they were reinstated by the nfl .
in california , the oakland raiders relocated to los angeles in 1000 , and back to oakland in 1000 , while the san diego chargers moved to los angeles in 2000 .
the houston oilers moved to tennessee in 1000 , where they were renamed the tennessee oilers .
the team would change its name again , two years later , to the tennessee titans .
the nfl would again expand in 2000 , adding the houston texans to the afc .
between 2000 and 2000 , the afc has sent either the baltimore ravens ( 2 times ), the denver broncos ( 2 times ), the indianapolis colts ( 2 times ), the oakland raiders ( 1 time ), the new england patriots ( 7 times ), and the pittsburgh steelers ( 3 times ) to the super bowl .
by contrast , the nfc has sent 10 different teams during that same time frame .
10 of the last 10 afc champions have started one of just three quarterbacks - tom brady , peyton manning , and ben roethlisberger - in the super bowl .
the merged league created a new logo for the afc that took elements of the old afl logo , specifically the " a " and the six stars surrounding it .
the afc logo basically remained unchanged from 1000 to 2000 .
the 2000 nfl season introduced an updated afc logo , with the most notable revision being the removal of two stars ( leaving four representing the four divisions of the afc ), and moving the stars inside the letter , similar to the nfc logo .
animal farm
animal farm is an allegorical novella by george orwell , first published in england on 10 august 1000 .
according to orwell , the book reflects events leading up to the russian revolution of 1000 and then on into the stalinist era of the soviet union .
orwell , a democratic socialist , was a critic of joseph stalin and hostile to moscow-directed stalinism , an attitude that was critically shaped by his experiences during the spanish civil war .
the soviet union , he believed , had become a brutal dictatorship , built upon a cult of personality and enforced by a reign of terror .
in a letter to yvonne davet , orwell described " animal farm " as a satirical tale against stalin ("" un conte satirique contre staline ""), and in his essay " why i write " ( 1000 ), wrote that " animal farm " was the first book in which he tried , with full consciousness of what he was doing , " to fuse political purpose and artistic purpose into one whole ".
the original title was " animal farm : a fairy story ;" u . s . publishers dropped the subtitle when it was published in 1000 , and only one of the translations during orwell 's lifetime kept it .
other titular variations include subtitles like "" a satire "" and "" a contemporary satire "".
orwell suggested the title " union des rpubliques socialistes animales " for the french translation , which abbreviates to ursa , the latin word for " bear ", a symbol of russia .
it also played on the french name of the soviet union , " union des rpubliques socialistes sovitiques ".
orwell wrote the book between november 1000 and february 1000 , when the uk was in its wartime alliance with the soviet union and the british people and intelligentsia held stalin in high esteem , a phenomenon orwell hated .
the manuscript was initially rejected by a number of british and american publishers , including one of orwell 's own , victor gollancz , which delayed its publication .
it became a great commercial success when it did appear partly because international relations were transformed as the wartime alliance gave way to the cold war .
" time " magazine chose the book as one of the 100 best english-language novels ( 1000 to 2000 ); it also featured at number 30 on the modern library list of best 20th-century novels .
it won a retrospective hugo award in 1000 , and is included in the great books of the western world selection .
old major , the old boar on the manor farm , summons the animals on the farm together for a meeting , during which he refers to humans as " enemies " and teaches the animals a revolutionary song called " beasts of england ".
when major dies , two young pigs , snowball and napoleon , assume command and consider it a duty to prepare for the rebellion .
the animals revolt and drive the drunken and irresponsible farmer mr . jones from the farm , renaming it " animal farm ".
they adopt the seven commandments of animalism , the most important of which is , " all animals are equal ."
snowball teaches the animals to read and write , while napoleon educates young puppies on the principles of animalism .
food is plentiful , and the farm runs smoothly .
the pigs elevate themselves to positions of leadership and set aside special food items , ostensibly for their personal health .
some time later , several men attack animal farm .
jones and his men are making an attempt to recapture the farm , aided by several other farmers who are terrified of similar animal revolts .
snowball and the animals , who are hiding in ambush , defeat the men by launching a surprise attack as soon as they enter the farmyard .
snowball 's popularity soars , and this event is proclaimed " the battle of the cowshed ".
it is celebrated annually with the firing of a gun , on the anniversary of the revolution .
napoleon and snowball vie for pre-eminence .
when snowball announces his plans to modernize the farm by building a windmill , napoleon has his dogs chase snowball away and declares himself leader .
napoleon enacts changes to the governance structure of the farm , replacing meetings with a committee of pigs who will run the farm .
through a young pig named squealer , napoleon claims credit for the windmill idea .
the animals work harder with the promise of easier lives with the windmill .
when the animals find the windmill collapsed after a violent storm , napoleon and squealer convince the animals that snowball is trying to sabotage their project .
once snowball becomes a scapegoat , napoleon begins to purge the farm with his dogs , killing animals he accuses of consorting with his old rival .
when some animals recall the battle of the cowshed , napoleon ( who was nowhere to be found during the battle ) frequently smears snowball as a collaborator of jones ', while falsely representing himself as the hero of the battle .
" beasts of england " is replaced with an anthem glorifying napoleon , who appears to be adopting the lifestyle of a man .
the animals remain convinced that they are better off than they were under mr . jones .
mr frederick , one of the neighbouring farmers , attacks the farm , using blasting powder to blow up the restored windmill .
though the animals win the battle , they do so at great cost , as many , including boxer the workhorse , are wounded .
despite his injuries , boxer continues working harder and harder , until he collapses while working on the windmill .
napoleon sends for a van to take boxer to the veterinary surgeon , explaining that better care can be given there .
benjamin , the cynical donkey who " could read as well as any pig ", notices that the van belongs to a knacker and attempts a futile rescue .
squealer quickly assures the animals that the van had been purchased from the knacker by an animal hospital , and the previous owner 's signboard had not been repainted .
in a subsequent report , squealer reports sadly to the animals that boxer died peacefully at the animal hospital ; the pigs hold a festival one day after boxer 's death to further praise the glories of animal farm and have the animals work harder by taking on boxer 's ways .
however , the truth was that napoleon had engineered the sale of boxer to the knacker , allowing him and his inner circle to acquire money to buy whisky for themselves .
( in 1000s england , one way for farms to make money was to sell large animals to a knacker , who would kill the animal and boil its remains into animal glue .)
years pass , and the windmill is rebuilt along with construction of another windmill , which makes the farm a good amount of income .
however , the ideals which snowball discussed , including stalls with electric lighting , heating and running water are forgotten , with napoleon advocating that the happiest animals live simple lives .
in addition to boxer , many of the animals who participated in the revolution are dead , as is farmer jones , who died in another part of england .
the pigs start to resemble humans , as they walk upright , carry whips , and wear clothes .
the seven commandments are abridged to a single phrase : " all animals are equal but some animals are more equal than others ".
napoleon holds a dinner party for the pigs and local farmers , with whom he celebrates a new alliance .
he abolishes the practice of the revolutionary traditions and restores the name " the manor farm ".
as the animals look from pigs to humans , they realise they can no longer distinguish between the two .
george orwell wrote the manuscript in 1000 and 1000 subsequent to his experiences during the spanish civil war , which he described in " homage to catalonia " ( 1000 ).
in the preface of a 1000 ukrainian edition of " animal farm ", he explained how escaping the communist purges in spain taught him " how easily totalitarian propaganda can control the opinion of enlightened people in democratic countries ".
this motivated orwell to expose and strongly condemn what he saw as the stalinist corruption of the original socialist ideals .
immediately prior to writing the book , orwell had quit the bbc .
he was also upset about a booklet for propagandists the ministry of information had put out .
the booklet included instructions on how to quell ideological fears of the soviet union , such as directions to claim that the red terror was a figment of nazi imagination .
in the preface , orwell also described the source of the idea of setting the book on a farm : orwell initially encountered difficulty getting the manuscript published , largely due to fears that the book might upset the alliance between britain , the united states , and the soviet union .
four publishers refused ; one had initially accepted the work but declined it after consulting the ministry of information .
eventually , secker and warburg published the first edition in 1000 .
during the second world war , it became clear to orwell that anti-soviet literature was not something which most major publishing houses would touchincluding his regular publisher gollancz .
he also submitted the manuscript to faber and faber , where the poet t . s . eliot ( who was a director of the firm ) rejected it ; eliot wrote back to orwell praising the book 's " good writing " and " fundamental integrity ", but declared that they would only accept it for publication if they had some sympathy for the viewpoint " which i take to be generally trotskyite ".
eliot said he found the view " not convincing ", and contended that the pigs were made out to be the best to run the farm ; he posited that someone might argue " what was needed ... was not more communism but more public-spirited pigs ".
orwell let andr deutsch , who was working for nicholson & watson in 1000 , read the typescript , and deutsch was convinced that nicholson & watson would want to publish it ; however , they did not , and " lectured orwell on what they perceived to be errors in " animal farm "."
in his " london letter " on 10 april 1000 for " partisan review ", orwell wrote that it was " now next door to impossible to get anything overtly anti-russian printed .
anti-russian books do appear , but mostly from catholic publishing firms and always from a religious or frankly reactionary angle ."
the publisher jonathan cape , who had initially accepted " animal farm ", subsequently rejected the book after an official at the british ministry of information warned him offalthough the civil servant who it is assumed gave the order was later found to be a soviet spy .
writing to leonard moore , a partner in the literary agency of christy & moore , publisher jonathan cape explained that the decision had been taken on the advice of a senior official in the ministry of information .
such flagrant anti-soviet bias was unacceptable , and the choice of pigs as the dominant class was thought to be especially offensive .
it may reasonably be assumed that the ' important official ' was a man named peter smollett , who was later unmasked as a soviet agent .
orwell was suspicious of smollett/smolka , and he would be one of the names orwell included in his list of crypto-communists and fellow-travellers sent to the information research department in 1000 .
born hans peter smolka in vienna in 1000 , he came to britain in 1000 as an nkvd agent with the codename ' abo ', became a naturalised british subject in 1000 , changed his name , and after the outbreak of world war ii joined the ministry of information where he organised pro-soviet propaganda , working with kim philby in 100000 .
smollett 's family have rejected the accusation that he was a spy .
the publisher wrote to orwell , saying : frederic warburg also faced pressures against publication , even from people in his own office and from his wife pamela , who felt that it was not the moment for ingratitude towards stalin and the heroic red army , which had played a major part in defeating hitler .
a russian translation was printed in the paper " posev ", and in giving permission for a russian translation of " animal farm ", orwell refused in advance all royalties .
a translation in ukrainian , which was produced in germany , was confiscated in large part by the american wartime authorities and handed over to the soviet repatriation commission .
in october 1000 , orwell wrote to frederic warburg expressing interest in pursuing the possibility that the political cartoonist david low might illustrate " animal farm ".
low had written a letter saying that he had had " a good time with " animal farm " an excellent bit of satireit would illustrate perfectly ."
nothing came of this , and a trial issue produced by secker & warburg in 1000 illustrated by john driver was abandoned , but the folio society published an edition in 1000 illustrated by quentin blake and an edition illustrated by the cartoonist ralph steadman was published by secker & warburg in 1000 to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the first edition of " animal farm ".
orwell originally wrote a preface complaining about british self-censorship and how the british people were suppressing criticism of the ussr , their world war ii ally :
although the first edition allowed space for the preface , it was not included , and as of june 2000 most editions of the book have not included it .
secker and warburg published the first edition of " animal farm " in 1000 without an introduction .
however , the publisher had provided space for a preface in the author 's proof composited from the manuscript .
for reasons unknown , no preface was supplied , and the page numbers had to be renumbered at the last minute .
in 1000 , ian angus found the original typescript titled " the freedom of the press ", and bernard crick published it , together with his own introduction , in " the times literary supplement " on 10 september 1000 as " how the essay came to be written ".
orwell 's essay criticised british self-censorship by the press , specifically the suppression of unflattering descriptions of stalin and the soviet government .
the same essay also appeared in the italian 1000 edition of " animal farm " with another introduction by crick , claiming to be the first edition with the preface .
other publishers were still declining to publish it .
contemporary reviews of the work were not universally positive .
writing in the american " new republic " magazine , george soule expressed his disappointment in the book , writing that it " puzzled and saddened me .
it seemed on the whole dull .
the allegory turned out to be a creaking machine for saying in a clumsy way things that have been said better directly ."
soule believed that the animals were not consistent enough with their real world inspirations , and said , " it seems to me that the failure of this book ( commercially it is already assured of tremendous success ) arises from the fact that the satire deals not with something the author has experienced , but rather with stereotyped ideas about a country which he probably does not know very well ".
" the guardian " on 20 august 1000 called " animal farm " " a delightfully humorous and caustic satire on the rule of the many by the few ".
tosco fyvel , writing in " tribune " on the same day , called the book " a gentle satire on a certain state and on the illusions of an age which may already be behind us ."
julian symons responded , on 7 september , " should we not expect , in " tribune " at least , acknowledgement of the fact that it is a satire not at all gentle upon a particular statesoviet russia ?
it seems to me that a reviewer should have the courage to identify napoleon with stalin , and snowball with trotsky , and express an opinion favourable or unfavourable to the author , upon a political ground .
in a hundred years time perhaps , " animal farm " may be simply a fairy story , today it is a political satire with a good deal of point ."
" animal farm " has been subject to much comment in the decades since these early remarks .
the pigs snowball , napoleon , and squealer adapt old major 's ideas into " a complete system of thought ", which they formally name animalism , an allegoric reference to communism .
soon after , napoleon and squealer partake in activities associated with the humans ( drinking alcohol , sleeping in beds , trading ), which were explicitly prohibited by the seven commandments .
squealer is employed to alter the seven commandments to account for this humanisation , an allusion to the soviet government 's revising of history in order to exercise control of the people 's beliefs about themselves and their society .
the original commandments are :
these commandments are also distilled into the maxim " four legs good , two legs bad !"
which is primarily used by the sheep on the farm , often to disrupt discussions and disagreements between animals on the nature of animalism .
later , napoleon and his pigs secretly revise some commandments to clear themselves of accusations of law-breaking .
the changed commandments are as follows , with the changes bolded :
eventually , these are replaced with the maxims , " all animals are equal but some animals are more equal than others ", and " four legs good , two legs better !"
as the pigs become more human .
this is an ironic twist to the original purpose of the seven commandments , which were supposed to keep order within animal farm by uniting the animals together against the humans and preventing animals from following the humans ' evil habits .
through the revision of the commandments , orwell demonstrates how simply political dogma can be turned into malleable propaganda .
in the eastern bloc , both " animal farm " and later " nineteen eighty-four " were on the list of forbidden books until the end of communist rule in 1000 , and were only available via clandestine samizdat networks .
orwell biographer jeffrey meyers has written , " virtually every detail has political significance in this allegory ."
orwell himself wrote in 1000 , " of course i intended it primarily as a satire on the russian revolution ..[ and ] " that kind " of revolution ( violent conspiratorial revolution , led by unconsciously power hungry people ) can only lead to a change of masters [-] revolutions only effect a radical improvement when the masses are alert ."
in a preface for a 1000 ukrainian edition , he stated , "... for the past ten years i have been convinced that the destruction of the soviet myth was essential if we wanted a revival of the socialist movement .
on my return from spain [ in 1000 ] i thought of exposing the soviet myth in a story that could be easily understood by almost anyone and which could be easily translated into other languages ."
the revolt of the animals against farmer jones is orwell 's analogy with the october 1000 bolshevik revolution .
the " battle of the cowshed " has been said to represent the allied invasion of soviet russia in 1000 , and the defeat of the white russians in the russian civil war .
the pigs ' rise to pre-eminence mirrors the rise of a stalinist bureaucracy in the ussr , just as napoleon 's emergence as the farm 's sole leader reflects stalin 's emergence .
the pigs ' appropriation of milk and apples for their own use , " the turning point of the story " as orwell termed it in a letter to dwight macdonald , stands as an analogy for the crushing of the left-wing 1000 kronstadt revolt against the bolsheviks , and the difficult efforts of the animals to build the windmill suggest the various five year plans .
the puppies controlled by napoleon parallel the nurture of the secret police in the stalinist structure , and the pigs ' treatment of the other animals on the farm recalls the internal terror faced by the populace in the 1000s .
in chapter seven , when the animals confess their nonexistent crimes and are killed , orwell directly alludes to the purges , confessions and show trials of the late 1000s .
these contributed to orwell 's conviction that the bolshevik revolution had been corrupted and the soviet system become rotten .
peter edgerly firchow and peter davison consider that the " battle of the windmill " represents the great patriotic war ( world war ii ), especially the battle of stalingrad and the battle of moscow .
during the battle , orwell first wrote , " all the animals , including napoleon " took cover .
orwell had the publisher alter this to " all the animals except napoleon " in recognition of stalin 's decision to remain in moscow during the german advance .
orwell requested the change after he met joseph czapski in paris in march 1000 .
czapski , a survivor of the katyn massacre and an opponent of the soviet regime , told orwell , as orwell wrote to arthur koestler , that it had been " the character [ and ] greatness of stalin " that saved russia from the german invasion .
other connections that writers have suggested illustrate orwell 's telescoping of russian history from 1000 to 1000 include the wave of rebelliousness that ran through the countryside after the rebellion , which stands for the abortive revolutions in hungary and in germany ( ch iv ); the conflict between napoleon and snowball ( ch v ), paralleling " the two rival and quasi-messianic beliefs that seemed pitted against one another : trotskyism , with its faith in the revolutionary vocation of the proletariat of the west ; and stalinism with its glorification of russia 's socialist destiny "; napoleon 's dealings with whymper and the willingdon markets ( ch vi ), paralleling the treaty of rapallo ; and frederick 's forged bank notes , paralleling the hitler-stalin non-aggression pact of august 1000 , after which frederick attacks animal farm without warning and destroys the windmill .
the book 's close , with the pigs and men in a kind of rapprochement , reflected orwell 's view of the 1000 teheran conference that seemed to display the establishment of " the best possible relations between the ussr and the west " but in reality were destined , as orwell presciently predicted , to continue to unravel .
the disagreement between the allies and the start of the cold war is suggested when napoleon and pilkington , both suspicious , " played an ace of spades simultaneously ".
similarly , the music in the novel , starting with " beasts of england " and the later anthems , parallels " the internationale " and its adoption and repudiation by the soviet authorities as the anthem of the ussr in the 1000s and 1000s .
" animal farm " has been adapted to film twice .
both differ from the novel and have been accused of taking significant liberties , including sanitising some aspects .
in 2000 , a hfr-3d version of " animal farm ", potentially directed by andy serkis was announced .
a bbc radio version , produced by rayner heppenstall , was broadcast in january 1000 .
orwell listened to the production at his home in canonbury square , london , with hugh gordon porteous , amongst others .
orwell later wrote to heppenstall that porteous , " who had not read the book , grasped what was happening after a few minutes ."
a further radio production , again using orwell 's own dramatisation of the book , was broadcast in january 2000 on bbc radio 4 .
tamsin greig narrated , and the cast included nicky henson as napoleon , toby jones as the propagandist squealer , and ralph ineson as boxer .
a theatrical version , with music by richard peaslee and lyrics by adrian mitchell , was staged at the national theatre london on 20 april 1000 , directed by peter hall .
it toured nine cities in 1000 .
a solo version , adapted and performed by guy masterson , premired at the traverse theatre edinburgh in january 1000 and has toured worldwide since .
a video game adaptation of " animal farm " was announced in august 2000 .
fully authorised by the estate of george orwell , " animal farm " is created by an independent team formed specifically to deliver orwells vision in an interactive format .
on 10 july 2000 , amazon . com withdrew certain amazon kindle titles , including " animal farm " and " nineteen eighty-four " by george orwell , from sale , refunded buyers , and remotely deleted items from purchasers ' devices after discovering that the publisher lacked rights to publish the titles in question .
notes and annotations for the books made by users on their devices were also deleted .
after the move prompted outcry and comparisons to " nineteen eighty-four " itself , amazon spokesman drew herdener stated that the company is "[ c ] hanging our systems so that in the future we will not remove books from customers ' devices in these circumstances ."
amphibian
amphibians are ectothermic , tetrapod vertebrates of the class amphibia .
modern amphibians are all lissamphibia .
they inhabit a wide variety of habitats , with most species living within terrestrial , fossorial , arboreal or freshwater aquatic ecosystems .
thus amphibians typically start out as larvae living in water , but some species have developed behavioural adaptations to bypass this .
the young generally undergo metamorphosis from larva with gills to an adult air-breathing form with lungs .
amphibians use their skin as a secondary respiratory surface and some small terrestrial salamanders and frogs lack lungs and rely entirely on their skin .
they are superficially similar to lizards but , along with mammals and birds , reptiles are amniotes and do not require water bodies in which to breed .
with their complex reproductive needs and permeable skins , amphibians are often ecological indicators ; in recent decades there has been a dramatic decline in amphibian populations for many species around the globe .
the earliest amphibians evolved in the devonian period from sarcopterygian fish with lungs and bony-limbed fins , features that were helpful in adapting to dry land .
they diversified and became dominant during the carboniferous and permian periods , but were later displaced by reptiles and other vertebrates .
over time , amphibians shrank in size and decreased in diversity , leaving only the modern subclass lissamphibia .
the three modern orders of amphibians are anura ( the frogs and toads ), urodela ( the salamanders ), and apoda ( the caecilians ).
the number of known amphibian species is approximately 7 , 000 , of which nearly 90 % are frogs .
the smallest amphibian ( and vertebrate ) in the world is a frog from new guinea (" paedophryne amauensis ") with a length of just .
the largest living amphibian is the chinese giant salamander (" andrias davidianus "), but this is dwarfed by the extinct " prionosuchus " from the middle permian of brazil .
the study of amphibians is called batrachology , while the study of both reptiles and amphibians is called herpetology .
the word " amphibian " is derived from the ancient greek term (" amphbios "), which means " both kinds of life ", "" meaning " of both kinds " and "" meaning " life ".
the term was initially used as a general adjective for animals that could live on land or in water , including seals and otters .
traditionally , the class amphibia includes all tetrapod vertebrates that are not amniotes .
amphibia in its widest sense (" sensu lato ") was divided into three subclasses , two of which are extinct : the actual number of species in each group depends on the taxonomic classification followed .
the two most common systems are the classification adopted by the website amphibiaweb , university of california , berkeley and the classification by herpetologist darrel frost and the american museum of natural history , available as the online reference database " amphibian species of the world ".
the numbers of species cited above follows frost and the total number of known amphibian species is over 7 , 000 , of which nearly 90 % are frogs .
with the phylogenetic classification , the taxon labyrinthodontia has been discarded as it is a polyparaphyletic group without unique defining features apart from shared primitive characteristics .
classification varies according to the preferred phylogeny of the author and whether they use a stem-based or a node-based classification .
traditionally , amphibians as a class are defined as all tetrapods with a larval stage , while the group that includes the common ancestors of all living amphibians ( frogs , salamanders and caecilians ) and all their descendants is called lissamphibia .
the phylogeny of paleozoic amphibians is uncertain , and lissamphibia may possibly fall within extinct groups , like the temnospondyli ( traditionally placed in the subclass labyrinthodontia ) or the lepospondyli , and in some analyses even in the amniotes .
this means that advocates of phylogenetic nomenclature have removed a large number of basal devonian and carboniferous amphibian-type tetrapod groups that were formerly placed in amphibia in linnaean taxonomy , and included them elsewhere under cladistic taxonomy .
if the common ancestor of amphibians and amniotes is included in amphibia , it becomes a paraphyletic group .
all modern amphibians are included in the subclass lissamphibia , which is usually considered a clade , a group of species that have evolved from a common ancestor .
the three modern orders are anura ( the frogs and toads ), caudata ( or urodela , the salamanders ), and gymnophiona ( or apoda , the caecilians ).
it has been suggested that salamanders arose separately from a temnospondyl-like ancestor , and even that caecilians are the sister group of the advanced reptiliomorph amphibians , and thus of amniotes .
although the fossils of several older proto-frogs with primitive characteristics are known , the oldest " true frog " is " prosalirus bitis ", from the early jurassic kayenta formation of arizona .
it is anatomically very similar to modern frogs .
the oldest known caecilian is another early jurassic species , " eocaecilia micropodia ", also from arizona .
the earliest salamander is " beiyanerpeton jianpingensis " from the late jurassic of northeastern china .
authorities disagree as to whether salientia is a superorder that includes the order anura , or whether anura is a sub-order of the order salientia .
the lissamphibia are traditionally divided into three orders , but an extinct salamander-like family , the albanerpetontidae , is now considered part of lissamphibia alongside the superorder salientia .
furthermore , salientia includes all three recent orders plus the triassic proto-frog , " triadobatrachus ".
the first major groups of amphibians developed in the devonian period , around 300 million years ago , from lobe-finned fish which were similar to the modern coelacanth and lungfish .
these ancient lobe-finned fish had evolved multi-jointed leg-like fins with digits that enabled them to crawl along the sea bottom .
some fish had developed primitive lungs to help them breathe air when the stagnant pools of the devonian swamps were low in oxygen .
they could also use their strong fins to hoist themselves out of the water and onto dry land if circumstances so required .
eventually , their bony fins would evolve into limbs and they would become the ancestors to all tetrapods , including modern amphibians , reptiles , birds , and mammals .
despite being able to crawl on land , many of these prehistoric tetrapodomorph fish still spent most of their time in the water .
they had started to develop lungs , but still breathed predominantly with gills .
many examples of species showing transitional features have been discovered .
" ichthyostega " was one of the first primitive amphibians , with nostrils and more efficient lungs .
it had four sturdy limbs , a neck , a tail with fins and a skull very similar to that of the lobe-finned fish , " eusthenopteron ".
amphibians evolved adaptations that allowed them to stay out of the water for longer periods .
their lungs improved and their skeletons became heavier and stronger , better able to support the weight of their bodies on land .
they developed " hands " and " feet " with five or more digits ; the skin became more capable of retaining body fluids and resisting desiccation .
the fish 's hyomandibula bone in the hyoid region behind the gills diminished in size and became the stapes of the amphibian ear , an adaptation necessary for hearing on dry land .
an affinity between the amphibians and the teleost fish is the multi-folded structure of the teeth and the paired supra-occipital bones at the back of the head , neither of these features being found elsewhere in the animal kingdom .
at the end of the devonian period ( 300 million years ago ), the seas , rivers and lakes were teeming with life while the land was the realm of early plants and devoid of vertebrates , though some , such as " ichthyostega ", may have sometimes hauled themselves out of the water .
it is thought they may have propelled themselves with their forelimbs , dragging their hindquarters in a similar manner to that used by the elephant seal .
in the early carboniferous ( 300 to 300 million years ago ), the climate became wet and warm .
extensive swamps developed with mosses , ferns , horsetails and calamites .
air-breathing arthropods evolved and invaded the land where they provided food for the carnivorous amphibians that began to adapt to the terrestrial environment .
there were no other tetrapods on the land and the amphibians were at the top of the food chain , occupying the ecological position currently held by the crocodile .
though equipped with limbs and the ability to breathe air , most still had a long tapering body and strong tail .
they were the top land predators , sometimes reaching several metres in length , preying on the large insects of the period and the many types of fish in the water .
they still needed to return to water to lay their shell-less eggs , and even most modern amphibians have a fully aquatic larval stage with gills like their fish ancestors .
it was the development of the amniotic egg , which prevents the developing embryo from drying out , that enabled the reptiles to reproduce on land and which led to their dominance in the period that followed .
after the carboniferous rainforest collapse amphibian dominance gave way to reptiles , and amphibians were further devastated by the permiantriassic extinction event .
during the triassic period ( 200 to 200 million years ago ), the reptiles continued to out-compete the amphibians , leading to a reduction in both the amphibians ' size and their importance in the biosphere .
according to the fossil record , lissamphibia , which includes all modern amphibians and is the only surviving lineage , may have branched off from the extinct groups temnospondyli and lepospondyli at some period between the late carboniferous and the early triassic .
the relative scarcity of fossil evidence precludes precise dating , but the most recent molecular study , based on multilocus sequence typing , suggests a late carboniferous/early permian origin for extant amphibians .
the origins and evolutionary relationships between the three main groups of amphibians is a matter of debate .
a 2000 molecular phylogeny , based on rdna analysis , suggests that salamanders and caecilians are more closely related to each other than they are to frogs .
it also appears that the divergence of the three groups took place in the paleozoic or early mesozoic ( around 200 million years ago ), before the breakup of the supercontinent pangaea and soon after their divergence from the lobe-finned fish .
the briefness of this period , and the swiftness with which radiation took place , would help account for the relative scarcity of primitive amphibian fossils .
there are large gaps in the fossil record , but the discovery of a proto-frog from the early permian in texas in 2000 provided a missing link with many of the characteristics of modern frogs .
molecular analysis suggests that the frogsalamander divergence took place considerably earlier than the palaeontological evidence indicates .
newer research indicates that the common ancestor of all lissamphibians lived about 300 million years ago , and that stereospondyls are the closest relatives to the caecilians .
as they evolved from lunged fish , amphibians had to make certain adaptations for living on land , including the need to develop new means of locomotion .
in the water , the sideways thrusts of their tails had propelled them forward , but on land , quite different mechanisms were required .
their vertebral columns , limbs , limb girdles and musculature needed to be strong enough to raise them off the ground for locomotion and feeding .
terrestrial adults discarded their lateral line systems and adapted their sensory systems to receive stimuli via the medium of the air .
they needed to develop new methods to regulate their body heat to cope with fluctuations in ambient temperature .
they developed behaviours suitable for reproduction in a terrestrial environment .
their skins were exposed to harmful ultraviolet rays that had previously been absorbed by the water .
the skin changed to become more protective and prevent excessive water loss .
the superclass tetrapoda is divided into four classes of vertebrate animals with four limbs .
reptiles , birds and mammals are amniotes , the eggs of which are either laid or carried by the female and are surrounded by several membranes , some of which are impervious .
lacking these membranes , amphibians require water bodies for reproduction , although some species have developed various strategies for protecting or bypassing the vulnerable aquatic larval stage .
they are not found in the sea with the exception of one or two frogs that live in brackish water in mangrove swamps .
on land , amphibians are restricted to moist habitats because of the need to keep their skin damp .
the smallest amphibian ( and vertebrate ) in the world is a microhylid frog from new guinea (" paedophryne amauensis ") first discovered in 2000 .
it has an average length of and is part of a genus that contains four of the world 's ten smallest frog species .
the largest living amphibian is the chinese giant salamander (" andrias davidianus ") but this is a great deal smaller than the largest amphibian that ever existedthe extinct " prionosuchus ", a crocodile-like temnospondyl dating to 200 million years ago from the middle permian of brazil !
the largest frog is the african goliath frog (" conraua goliath "), which can reach and weigh .
amphibians are ectothermic ( cold-blooded ) vertebrates that do not maintain their body temperature through internal physiological processes .
their metabolic rate is low and as a result , their food and energy requirements are limited .
in the adult state , they have tear ducts and movable eyelids , and most species have ears that can detect airborne or ground vibrations .
they have muscular tongues , which in many species can be protruded .
modern amphibians have fully ossified vertebrae with articular processes .
their ribs are usually short and may be fused to the vertebrae .
their skulls are mostly broad and short , and are often incompletely ossified .
their skin contains little keratin and lacks scales , apart from a few fish-like scales in certain caecilians .
the skin contains many mucous glands and in some species , poison glands ( a type of granular gland ).
the hearts of amphibians have three chambers , two atria and one ventricle .
they have a urinary bladder and nitrogenous waste products are excreted primarily as urea .
most amphibians lay their eggs in water and have aquatic larvae that undergo metamorphosis to become terrestrial adults .
amphibians breathe by means of a pump action in which air is first drawn into the buccopharyngeal region through the nostrils .
these are then closed and the air is forced into the lungs by contraction of the throat .
they supplement this with gas exchange through the skin .
the order anura ( from the ancient greek " a ( n )-" meaning " without " and " oura " meaning " tail ") comprises the frogs and toads .
they usually have long hind limbs that fold underneath them , shorter forelimbs , webbed toes with no claws , no tails , large eyes and glandular moist skin .
members of this order with smooth skins are commonly referred to as frogs , while those with warty skins are known as toads .
the difference is not a formal one taxonomically and there are numerous exceptions to this rule .
members of the family bufonidae are known as the " true toads ".
frogs range in size from the goliath frog (" conraua goliath ") of west africa to the " paedophryne amauensis ", first described in papua new guinea in 2000 , which is also the smallest known vertebrate .
although most species are associated with water and damp habitats , some are specialised to live in trees or in deserts .
they are found worldwide except for polar areas .
anura is divided into three suborders that are broadly accepted by the scientific community , but the relationships between some families remain unclear .
future molecular studies should provide further insights into their evolutionary relationships .
the suborder archaeobatrachia contains four families of primitive frogs .
these are ascaphidae , bombinatoridae , discoglossidae and leiopelmatidae which have few derived features and are probably paraphyletic with regard to other frog lineages .
the six families in the more evolutionarily advanced suborder mesobatrachia are the fossorial megophryidae , pelobatidae , pelodytidae , scaphiopodidae and rhinophrynidae and the obligatorily aquatic pipidae .
these have certain characteristics that are intermediate between the two other suborders .
neobatrachia is by far the largest suborder and includes the remaining families of modern frogs , including most common species .
ninety-six percent of the over 5 , 000 extant species of frog are neobatrachians .
the order caudata ( from the latin " cauda " meaning " tail ") consists of the salamanderselongated , low-slung animals that mostly resemble lizards in form .
this is a symplesiomorphic trait and they are no more closely related to lizards than they are to mammals .
salamanders lack claws , have scale-free skins , either smooth or covered with tubercles , and tails that are usually flattened from side to side and often finned .
they range in size from the chinese giant salamander (" andrias davidianus "), which has been reported to grow to a length of , to the diminutive " thorius pennatulus " from mexico which seldom exceeds in length .
salamanders have a mostly laurasian distribution , being present in much of the holarctic region of the northern hemisphere .
the family plethodontidae is also found in central america and south america north of the amazon basin ; south america was apparently invaded from central america by about the start of the miocene , 20 million years ago .
urodela is a name sometimes used for all the extant species of salamanders .
members of several salamander families have become paedomorphic and either fail to complete their metamorphosis or retain some larval characteristics as adults .
most salamanders are under long .
they may be terrestrial or aquatic and many spend part of the year in each habitat .
when on land , they mostly spend the day hidden under stones or logs or in dense vegetation , emerging in the evening and night to forage for worms , insects and other invertebrates .
the suborder cryptobranchoidea contains the primitive salamanders .
a number of fossil cryptobranchids have been found , but there are only three living species , the chinese giant salamander (" andrias davidianus "), the japanese giant salamander (" andrias japonicus ") and the hellbender (" cryptobranchus alleganiensis ") from north america .
these large amphibians retain several larval characteristics in their adult state ; gills slits are present and the eyes are unlidded .
a unique feature is their ability to feed by suction , depressing either the left side of their lower jaw or the right .
the males excavate nests , persuade females to lay their egg strings inside them , and guard them .
as well as breathing with lungs , they respire through the many folds in their thin skin , which has capillaries close to the surface .
the suborder salamandroidea contains the advanced salamanders .
they differ from the cryptobranchids by having fused prearticular bones in the lower jaw , and by using internal fertilisation .
in salamandrids , the male deposits a bundle of sperm , the spermatophore , and the female picks it up and inserts it into her cloaca where the sperm is stored until the eggs are laid .
the largest family in this group is plethodontidae , the lungless salamanders , which includes 60 % of all salamander species .
the family salamandridae includes the true salamanders and the name " newt " is given to members of its subfamily pleurodelinae .
the third suborder , sirenoidea , contains the four species of sirens , which are in a single family , sirenidae .
members of this order are eel-like aquatic salamanders with much reduced forelimbs and no hind limbs .
some of their features are primitive while others are derived .
fertilisation is likely to be external as sirenids lack the cloacal glands used by male salamandrids to produce spermatophores and the females lack spermathecae for sperm storage .
despite this , the eggs are laid singly , a behaviour not conducive for external fertilisation .
the order gymnophiona ( from the greek " gymnos " meaning " naked " and " ophis " meaning " serpent ") or apoda ( from the latin " an -" meaning " without " and the greek " poda " meaning " legs ") comprises the caecilians .
these are long , cylindrical , limbless animals with a snake - or worm-like form .
the adults vary in length from 8 to 70 centimetres ( 3 to 30 inches ) with the exception of thomson 's caecilian (" caecilia thompsoni "), which can reach .
a caecilian 's skin has a large number of transverse folds and in some species contains tiny embedded dermal scales .
it has rudimentary eyes covered in skin , which are probably limited to discerning differences in light intensity .
it also has a pair of short tentacles near the eye that can be extended and which have tactile and olfactory functions .
most caecilians live underground in burrows in damp soil , in rotten wood and under plant debris , but some are aquatic .
most species lay their eggs underground and when the larvae hatch , they make their way to adjacent bodies of water .
others brood their eggs and the larvae undergo metamorphosis before the eggs hatch .
a few species give birth to live young , nourishing them with glandular secretions while they are in the oviduct .
caecilians have a mostly gondwanan distribution , being found in tropical regions of africa , asia and central and south america .
the structure contains some typical characteristics common to terrestrial vertebrates , such as the presence of highly cornified outer layers , renewed periodically through a moulting process controlled by the pituitary and thyroid glands .
local thickenings ( often called warts ) are common , such as those found on toads .
the outside of the skin is shed periodically mostly in one piece , in contrast to mammals and birds where it is shed in flakes .
amphibians often eat the sloughed skin .
caecilians are unique among amphibians in having mineralized dermal scales embedded in the dermis between the furrows in the skin .
the similarity of these to the scales of bony fish is largely superficial .
lizards and some frogs have somewhat similar osteoderms forming bony deposits in the dermis , but this is an example of convergent evolution with similar structures having arisen independently in diverse vertebrate lineages .
amphibian skin is permeable to water .
gas exchange can take place through the skin ( cutaneous respiration ) and this allows adult amphibians to respire without rising to the surface of water and to hibernate at the bottom of ponds .
to compensate for their thin and delicate skin , amphibians have evolved mucous glands , principally on their heads , backs and tails .
the secretions produced by these help keep the skin moist .
in addition , most species of amphibian have granular glands that secrete distasteful or poisonous substances .
some amphibian toxins can be lethal to humans while others have little effect .
the main poison-producing glands , the paratoids , produce the neurotoxin bufotoxin and are located behind the ears of toads , along the backs of frogs , behind the eyes of salamanders and on the upper surface of caecilians .
the skin colour of amphibians is produced by three layers of pigment cells called chromatophores .
these three cell layers consist of the melanophores ( occupying the deepest layer ), the guanophores ( forming an intermediate layer and containing many granules , producing a blue-green colour ) and the lipophores ( yellow , the most superficial layer ).
the colour change displayed by many species is initiated by hormones secreted by the pituitary gland .
unlike bony fish , there is no direct control of the pigment cells by the nervous system , and this results in the colour change taking place more slowly than happens in fish .
a vividly coloured skin usually indicates that the species is toxic and is a warning sign to predators .
amphibians have a skeletal system that is structurally homologous to other tetrapods , though with a number of variations .
they all have four limbs except for the legless caecilians and a few species of salamander with reduced or no limbs .
the bones are hollow and lightweight .
the musculoskeletal system is strong to enable it to support the head and body .
the bones are fully ossified and the vertebrae interlock with each other by means of overlapping processes .
the pectoral girdle is supported by muscle , and the well-developed pelvic girdle is attached to the backbone by a pair of sacral ribs .
the ilium slopes forward and the body is held closer to the ground than is the case in mammals .
in most amphibians , there are four digits on the fore foot and five on the hind foot , but no claws on either .
some salamanders have fewer digits and the amphiumas are eel-like in appearance with tiny , stubby legs .
the sirens are aquatic salamanders with stumpy forelimbs and no hind limbs .
the caecilians are limbless .
they burrow in the manner of earthworms with zones of muscle contractions moving along the body .
on the surface of the ground or in water they move by undulating their body from side to side .
in frogs , the hind legs are larger than the fore legs , especially so in those species that principally move by jumping or swimming .
in the walkers and runners the hind limbs are not so large , and the burrowers mostly have short limbs and broad bodies .
the feet have adaptations for the way of life , with webbing between the toes for swimming , broad adhesive toe pads for climbing , and keratinised tubercles on the hind feet for digging ( frogs usually dig backwards into the soil ).
in most salamanders , the limbs are short and more or less the same length and project at right angles from the body .
locomotion on land is by walking and the tail often swings from side to side or is used as a prop , particularly when climbing .
in their normal gait , only one leg is advanced at a time in the manner adopted by their ancestors , the lobe-finned fish .
some salamanders in the genus " aneides " and certain plethodontids climb trees and have long limbs , large toepads and prehensile tails .
in aquatic salamanders and in frog tadpoles , the tail has dorsal and ventral fins and is moved from side to side as a means of propulsion .
adult frogs do not have tails and caecilians have only very short ones .
salamanders use their tails in defence and some are prepared to jettison them to save their lives in a process known as autotomy .
certain species in the plethodontidae have a weak zone at the base of the tail and use this strategy readily .
the tail often continues to twitch after separation which may distract the attacker and allow the salamander to escape .
both tails and limbs can be regenerated .
adult frogs are unable to regrow limbs but tadpoles can do so .
amphibians have a juvenile stage and an adult stage , and the circulatory systems of the two are distinct .
in the juvenile ( or tadpole ) stage , the circulation is similar to that of a fish ; the two-chambered heart pumps the blood through the gills where it is oxygenated , and is spread around the body and back to the heart in a single loop .
in the adult stage , amphibians ( especially frogs ) lose their gills and develop lungs .
they have a heart that consists of a single ventricle and two atria .
when the ventricle starts contracting , deoxygenated blood is pumped through the pulmonary artery to the lungs .
continued contraction then pumps oxygenated blood around the rest of the body .
mixing of the two bloodstreams is minimized by the anatomy of the chambers .
the nervous system is basically the same as in other vertebrates , with a central brain , a spinal cord , and nerves throughout the body .
the amphibian brain is less well developed than that of reptiles , birds and mammals but is similar in morphology and function to that of a fish .
it is believed amphibians are capable of perceiving pain .
the brain consists of equal parts , cerebrum , midbrain and cerebellum .
various parts of the cerebrum process sensory input , such as smell in the olfactory lobe and sight in the optic lobe , and it is additionally the centre of behaviour and learning .
the cerebellum is the center of muscular coordination and the medulla oblongata controls some organ functions including heartbeat and respiration .
the brain sends signals through the spinal cord and nerves to regulate activity in the rest of the body .
the pineal body , known to regulate sleep patterns in humans , is thought to produce the hormones involved in hibernation and aestivation in amphibians .
tadpoles retain the lateral line system of their ancestral fishes , but this is lost in terrestrial adult amphibians .
some caecilians possess electroreceptors that allow them to locate objects around them when submerged in water .
the ears are well developed in frogs .
there is no external ear , but the large circular eardrum lies on the surface of the head just behind the eye .
this vibrates and sound is transmitted through a single bone , the stapes , to the inner ear .
only high-frequency sounds like mating calls are heard in this way , but low-frequency noises can be detected through another mechanism .
there is a patch of specialized haircells , called " papilla amphibiorum ", in the inner ear capable of detecting deeper sounds .
another feature , unique to frogs and salamanders , is the columella-operculum complex adjoining the auditory capsule which is involved in the transmission of both airborne and seismic signals .
the ears of salamanders and caecilians are less highly developed than those of frogs as they do not normally communicate with each other through the medium of sound .
the eyes of tadpoles lack lids , but at metamorphosis , the cornea becomes more dome-shaped , the lens becomes flatter , and eyelids and associated glands and ducts develop .
the adult eyes are an improvement on invertebrate eyes and were a first step in the development of more advanced vertebrate eyes .
they allow colour vision and depth of focus .
in the retinas are green rods , which are receptive to a wide range of wavelengths .
many amphibians catch their prey by flicking out an elongated tongue with a sticky tip and drawing it back into the mouth before seizing the item with their jaws .
some use inertial feeding to help them swallow the prey , repeatedly thrusting their head forward sharply causing the food to move backwards in their mouth by inertia .
most amphibians swallow their prey whole without much chewing so they possess voluminous stomachs .
the short oesophagus is lined with cilia that help to move the food to the stomach and mucus produced by glands in the mouth and pharynx eases its passage .
the enzyme chitinase produced in the stomach helps digest the chitinous cuticle of arthropod prey .
amphibians possess a pancreas , liver and gall bladder .
the liver is usually large with two lobes .
its size is determined by its function as a glycogen and fat storage unit , and may change with the seasons as these reserves are built or used up .
adipose tissue is another important means of storing energy and this occurs in the abdomen ( in internal structures called fat bodies ), under the skin and , in some salamanders , in the tail .
there are two kidneys located dorsally , near the roof of the body cavity .
their job is to filter the blood of metabolic waste and transport the urine via ureters to the urinary bladder where it is stored before being passed out periodically through the cloacal vent .
larvae and most aquatic adult amphibians excrete the nitrogen as ammonia in large quantities of dilute urine , while terrestrial species , with a greater need to conserve water , excrete the less toxic product urea .
some tree frogs with limited access to water excrete most of their metabolic waste as uric acid .
the lungs in amphibians are primitive compared to those of amniotes , possessing few internal septa and large alveoli , and consequently having a comparatively slow diffusion rate for oxygen entering the blood .
ventilation is accomplished by buccal pumping .
most amphibians , however , are able to exchange gases with the water or air via their skin .
to enable sufficient cutaneous respiration , the surface of their highly vascularised skin must remain moist to allow the oxygen to diffuse at a sufficiently high rate .
because oxygen concentration in the water increases at both low temperatures and high flow rates , aquatic amphibians in these situations can rely primarily on cutaneous respiration , as in the titicaca water frog and the hellbender salamander .
in air , where oxygen is more concentrated , some small species can rely solely on cutaneous gas exchange , most famously the plethodontid salamanders , which have neither lungs nor gills .
many aquatic salamanders and all tadpoles have gills in their larval stage , with some ( such as the axolotl ) retaining gills as aquatic adults .
for the purpose of reproduction most amphibians require fresh water although some lay their eggs on land and have developed various means of keeping them moist .
a few ( e . g .
" fejervarya raja ") can inhabit brackish water , but there are no true marine amphibians .
there are reports , however , of particular amphibian populations unexpectedly invading marine waters .
such was the case with the black sea invasion of the natural hybrid " pelophylax esculentus " reported in 2000 .
several hundred frog species in adaptive radiations ( e . g ., " eleutherodactylus ", the pacific " platymantis ", the australo-papuan microhylids , and many other tropical frogs ), however , do not need any water for breeding in the wild .
they reproduce via direct development , an ecological and evolutionary adaptation that has allowed them to be completely independent from free-standing water .
almost all of these frogs live in wet tropical rainforests and their eggs hatch directly into miniature versions of the adult , passing through the tadpole stage within the egg .
reproductive success of many amphibians is dependent not only on the quantity of rainfall , but the seasonal timing .
in the tropics , many amphibians breed continuously or at any time of year .
in temperate regions , breeding is mostly seasonal , usually in the spring , and is triggered by increasing day length , rising temperatures or rainfall .
experiments have shown the importance of temperature , but the trigger event , especially in arid regions , is often a storm .
in anurans , males usually arrive at the breeding sites before females and the vocal chorus they produce may stimulate ovulation in females and the endocrine activity of males that are not yet reproductively active .
in caecilians , fertilisation is internal , the male extruding an intromittent organ , the phallodeum , and inserting it into the female cloaca .
the paired mllerian glands inside the male cloaca secrete a fluid which resembles that produced by mammalian prostate glands and which may transport and nourish the sperm .
fertilisation probably takes place in the oviduct .
the majority of salamanders also engage in internal fertilisation .
in most of these , the male deposits a spermatophore , a small packet of sperm on top of a gelatinous cone , on the substrate either on land or in the water .
the female takes up the sperm packet by grasping it with the lips of the cloaca and pushing it into the vent .
the spermatozoa move to the spermatheca in the roof of the cloaca where they remain until ovulation which may be many months later .
courtship rituals and methods of transfer of the spermatophore vary between species .
in some , the spermatophore may be placed directly into the female cloaca while in others , the female may be guided to the spermatophore or restrained with an embrace called amplexus .
certain primitive salamanders in the families sirenidae , hynobiidae and cryptobranchidae practice external fertilisation in a similar manner to frogs , with the female laying the eggs in water and the male releasing sperm onto the egg mass .
with a few exceptions , frogs use external fertilisation .
the male grasps the female tightly with his forelimbs either behind the arms or in front of the back legs , or in the case of " epipedobates tricolor ", around the neck .
they remain in amplexus with their cloacae positioned close together while the female lays the eggs and the male covers them with sperm .
roughened nuptial pads on the male 's hands aid in retaining grip .
often the male collects and retains the egg mass , forming a sort of basket with the hind feet .
an exception is the granular poison frog (" oophaga granulifera ") where the male and female place their cloacae in close proximity while facing in opposite directions and then release eggs and sperm simultaneously .
the tailed frog (" ascaphus truei ") exhibits internal fertilisation .
the " tail " is only possessed by the male and is an extension of the cloaca and used to inseminate the female .
this frog lives in fast-flowing streams and internal fertilisation prevents the sperm from being washed away before fertilisation occurs .
the sperm may be retained in storage tubes attached to the oviduct until the following spring .
most frogs can be classified as either prolonged or explosive breeders .
typically , prolonged breeders congregate at a breeding site , the males usually arriving first , calling and setting up territories .
other satellite males remain quietly nearby , waiting for their opportunity to take over a territory .
the females arrive sporadically , mate selection takes place and eggs are laid .
the females depart and territories may change hands .
more females appear and in due course , the breeding season comes to an end .
explosive breeders on the other hand are found where temporary pools appear in dry regions after rainfall .
these frogs are typically fossorial species that emerge after heavy rains and congregate at a breeding site .
they are attracted there by the calling of the first male to find a suitable place , perhaps a pool that forms in the same place each rainy season .
the assembled frogs may call in unison and frenzied activity ensues , the males scrambling to mate with the usually smaller number of females .
there is a direct competition between males to win the attention of the females in salamanders and newts , with elaborate courtship displays to keep the female 's attention long enough to get her interested in choosing him to mate with .
some species store sperm through long breeding seasons , as the extra time may allow for interactions with rival sperm .
most amphibians go through metamorphosis , a process of significant morphological change after birth .
in typical amphibian development , eggs are laid in water and larvae are adapted to an aquatic lifestyle .
frogs , toads and salamanders all hatch from the egg as larvae with external gills .
metamorphosis in amphibians is regulated by thyroxine concentration in the blood , which stimulates metamorphosis , and prolactin , which counteracts thyroxine 's effect .
specific events are dependent on threshold values for different tissues .
because most embryonic development is outside the parental body , it is subject to many adaptations due to specific environmental circumstances .
for this reason tadpoles can have horny ridges instead of teeth , whisker-like skin extensions or fins .
they also make use of a sensory lateral line organ similar to that of fish .
after metamorphosis , these organs become redundant and will be reabsorbed by controlled cell death , called apoptosis .
the variety of adaptations to specific environmental circumstances among amphibians is wide , with many discoveries still being made .
the egg of an amphibian is typically surrounded by a transparent gelatinous covering secreted by the oviducts and containing mucoproteins and mucopolysaccharides .
this capsule is permeable to water and gases , and swells considerably as it absorbs water .
the ovum is at first rigidly held , but in fertilised eggs the innermost layer liquefies and allows the embryo to move freely .
this also happens in salamander eggs , even when they are unfertilised .
eggs of some salamanders and frogs contain unicellular green algae .
these penetrate the jelly envelope after the eggs are laid and may increase the supply of oxygen to the embryo through photosynthesis .
they seem to both speed up the development of the larvae and reduce mortality .
most eggs contain the pigment melanin which raises their temperature through the absorption of light and also protects them against ultraviolet radiation .
caecilians , some plethodontid salamanders and certain frogs lay eggs underground that are unpigmented .
in the wood frog (" rana sylvatica "), the interior of the globular egg cluster has been found to be up to warmer than its surroundings , which is an advantage in its cool northern habitat .
the eggs may be deposited singly or in small groups , or may take the form of spherical egg masses , rafts or long strings .
in terrestrial caecilians , the eggs are laid in grape-like clusters in burrows near streams .
the amphibious salamander " ensatina " attaches its similar clusters by stalks to underwater stems and roots .
the greenhouse frog (" eleutherodactylus planirostris ") lays eggs in small groups in the soil where they develop in about two weeks directly into juvenile frogs without an intervening larval stage .
the tungara frog (" physalaemus pustulosus ") builds a floating nest from foam to protect its eggs .
first a raft is built , then eggs are laid in the centre , and finally a foam cap is overlaid .
the foam has anti-microbial properties .
it contains no detergents but is created by whipping up proteins and lectins secreted by the female .
the eggs of amphibians are typically laid in water and hatch into free-living larvae that complete their development in water and later transform into either aquatic or terrestrial adults .
in many species of frog and in most lungless salamanders ( plethodontidae ), direct development takes place , the larvae growing within the eggs and emerging as miniature adults .
many caecilians and some other amphibians lay their eggs on land , and the newly hatched larvae wriggle or are transported to water bodies .
some caecilians , the alpine salamander (" salamandra atra ") and some of the african live-bearing toads (" nectophrynoides spp .")
are viviparous .
their larvae feed on glandular secretions and develop within the female 's oviduct , often for long periods .
other amphibians , but not caecilians , are ovoviviparous .
the eggs are retained in or on the parent 's body , but the larvae subsist on the yolks of their eggs and receive no nourishment from the adult .
the larvae emerge at varying stages of their growth , either before or after metamorphosis , according to their species .
the toad genus " nectophrynoides " exhibits all of these developmental patterns among its dozen or so members .
frog larvae are known as tadpoles and typically have oval bodies and long , vertically flattened tails with fins .
the free-living larvae are normally fully aquatic , but the tadpoles of some species ( such as " nannophrys ceylonensis ") are semi-terrestrial and live among wet rocks .
tadpoles have cartilaginous skeletons , gills for respiration ( external gills at first , internal gills later ), lateral line systems and large tails that they use for swimming .
newly hatched tadpoles soon develop gill pouches that cover the gills .
the lungs develop early and are used as accessory breathing organs , the tadpoles rising to the water surface to gulp air .
some species complete their development inside the egg and hatch directly into small frogs .
these larvae do not have gills but instead have specialised areas of skin through which respiration takes place .
while tadpoles do not have true teeth , in most species , the jaws have long , parallel rows of small keratinized structures called keradonts surrounded by a horny beak .
front legs are formed under the gill sac and hind legs become visible a few days later .
iodine and t4 ( over stimulate the spectacular apoptosis [ programmed cell death ] of the cells of the larval gills , tail and fins ) also stimulate the evolution of nervous systems transforming the aquatic , vegetarian tadpole into the terrestrial , carnivorous frog with better neurological , visuospatial , olfactory and cognitive abilities for hunting .
in fact , tadpoles developing in ponds and streams are typically herbivorous .
pond tadpoles tend to have deep bodies , large caudal fins and small mouths ; they swim in the quiet waters feeding on growing or loose fragments of vegetation .
stream dwellers mostly have larger mouths , shallow bodies and caudal fins ; they attach themselves to plants and stones and feed on the surface films of algae and bacteria .
they also feed on diatoms , filtered from the water through the gills , and stir up the sediment at bottom of the pond , ingesting edible fragments .
they have a relatively long , spiral-shaped gut to enable them to digest this diet .
some species are carnivorous at the tadpole stage , eating insects , smaller tadpoles and fish .
young of the cuban tree frog (" osteopilus septentrionalis ") can occasionally be cannibalistic , the younger tadpoles attacking a larger , more developed tadpole when it is undergoing metamorphosis .
at metamorphosis , rapid changes in the body take place as the lifestyle of the frog changes completely .
the spiralshaped mouth with horny tooth ridges is reabsorbed together with the spiral gut .
the animal develops a large jaw , and its gills disappear along with its gill sac .
eyes and legs grow quickly , and a tongue is formed .
there are associated changes in the neural networks such as development of stereoscopic vision and loss of the lateral line system .
all this can happen in about a day .
a few days later , the tail is reabsorbed , due to the higher thyroxine concentration required for this to take place .
at hatching , a typical salamander larva has eyes without lids , teeth in both upper and lower jaws , three pairs of feathery external gills , a somewhat laterally flattened body and a long tail with dorsal and ventral fins .
the forelimbs may be partially developed and the hind limbs are rudimentary in pond-living species but may be rather more developed in species that reproduce in moving water .
pond-type larvae often have a pair of balancers , rod-like structures on either side of the head that may prevent the gills from becoming clogged up with sediment .
some members of the genera " ambystoma " and " dicamptodon " have larvae that never fully develop into the adult form , but this varies with species and with populations .
the northwestern salamander (" ambystoma gracile ") is one of these and , depending on environmental factors , either remains permanently in the larval state , a condition known as neoteny , or transforms into an adult .
both of these are able to breed .
neoteny occurs when the animal 's growth rate is very low and is usually linked to adverse conditions such as low water temperatures that may change the response of the tissues to the hormone thyroxine .
other factors that may inhibit metamorphosis include lack of food , lack of trace elements and competition from conspecifics .
the tiger salamander (" ambystoma tigrinum ") also sometimes behaves in this way and may grow particularly large in the process .
the adult tiger salamander is terrestrial , but the larva is aquatic and able to breed while still in the larval state .
when conditions are particularly inhospitable on land , larval breeding may allow continuation of a population that would otherwise die out .
there are fifteen species of obligate neotenic salamanders , including species of " necturus ", " proteus " and " amphiuma ", and many examples of facultative ones that adopt this strategy under appropriate environmental circumstances .
lungless salamanders in the family plethodontidae are terrestrial and lay a small number of unpigmented eggs in a cluster among damp leaf litter .
each egg has a large yolk sac and the larva feeds on this while it develops inside the egg , emerging fully formed as a juvenile salamander .
the female salamander often broods the eggs .
in the genus " ensatinas ", the female has been observed to coil around them and press her throat area against them , effectively massaging them with a mucous secretion .
in newts and salamanders , metamorphosis is less dramatic than in frogs .
this is because the larvae are already carnivorous and continue to feed as predators when they are adults so few changes are needed to their digestive systems .
their lungs are functional early , but the larvae do not make as much use of them as do tadpoles .
their gills are never covered by gill sacs and are reabsorbed just before the animals leave the water .
other changes include the reduction in size or loss of tail fins , the closure of gill slits , thickening of the skin , the development of eyelids , and certain changes in dentition and tongue structure .
salamanders are at their most vulnerable at metamorphosis as swimming speeds are reduced and transforming tails are encumbrances on land .
adult salamanders often have an aquatic phase in spring and summer , and a land phase in winter .
for adaptation to a water phase , prolactin is the required hormone , and for adaptation to the land phase , thyroxine .
external gills do not return in subsequent aquatic phases because these are completely absorbed upon leaving the water for the first time .
most terrestrial caecilians that lay eggs do so in burrows or moist places on land near bodies of water .
the development of the young of " ichthyophis glutinosus ", a species from sri lanka , has been much studied .
the eel-like larvae hatch out of the eggs and make their way to water .
they have three pairs of external red feathery gills , a blunt head with two rudimentary eyes , a lateral line system and a short tail with fins .
they swim by undulating their body from side to side .
they are mostly active at night , soon lose their gills and make sorties onto land .
metamorphosis is gradual .
by the age of about ten months they have developed a pointed head with sensory tentacles near the mouth and lost their eyes , lateral line systems and tails .
the skin thickens , embedded scales develop and the body divides into segments .
by this time , the caecilian has constructed a burrow and is living on land .
in the majority of species of caecilians , the young are produced by vivipary .
" typhlonectes compressicauda ", a species from south america , is typical of these .
up to nine larvae can develop in the oviduct at any one time .
they are elongated and have paired sac-like gills , small eyes and specialised scraping teeth .
at first , they feed on the yolks of the eggs , but as this source of nourishment declines they begin to rasp at the ciliated epithelial cells that line the oviduct .
this stimulates the secretion of fluids rich in lipids and mucoproteins on which they feed along with scrapings from the oviduct wall .
they may increase their length sixfold and be two-fifths as long as their mother before being born .
by this time they have undergone metamorphosis , lost their eyes and gills , developed a thicker skin and mouth tentacles , and reabsorbed their teeth .
a permanent set of teeth grow through soon after birth .
the ringed caecilian (" siphonops annulatus ") has developed a unique adaptation for the purposes of reproduction .
the progeny feed on a skin layer that is specially developed by the adult in a phenomenon known as maternal dermatophagy .
the brood feed as a batch for about seven minutes at intervals of approximately three days which gives the skin an opportunity to regenerate .
meanwhile , they have been observed to ingest fluid exuded from the maternal cloaca .
the care of offspring among amphibians has been little studied but , in general , the larger the number of eggs in a batch , the less likely it is that any degree of parental care takes place .
nevertheless , it is estimated that in up to 20 % of amphibian species , one or both adults play some role in the care of the young .
those species that breed in smaller water bodies or other specialised habitats tend to have complex patterns of behaviour in the care of their young .
many woodland salamanders lay clutches of eggs under dead logs or stones on land .
the black mountain salamander (" desmognathus welteri ") does this , the mother brooding the eggs and guarding them from predation as the embryos feed on the yolks of their eggs .
when fully developed , they break their way out of the egg capsules and disperse as juvenile salamanders .
the male hellbender , a primitive salamander , excavates an underwater nest and encourages females to lay there .
the male then guards the site for the two or three months before the eggs hatch , using body undulations to fan the eggs and increase their supply of oxygen .
the male " colostethus subpunctatus ", a tiny frog , protects the egg cluster which is hidden under a stone or log .
when the eggs hatch , the male transports the tadpoles on his back , stuck there by a mucous secretion , to a temporary pool where he dips himself into the water and the tadpoles drop off .
the male midwife toad (" alytes obstetricans ") winds egg strings round his thighs and carries the eggs around for up to eight weeks .
he keeps them moist and when they are ready to hatch , he visits a pond or ditch and releases the tadpoles .
the female gastric-brooding frog (" rheobatrachus spp .")
reared larvae in her stomach after swallowing either the eggs or hatchlings ; however , this stage was never observed before the species became extinct .
the tadpoles secrete a hormone that inhibits digestion in the mother whilst they develop by consuming their very large yolk supply .
the pouched frog (" assa darlingtoni ") lays eggs on the ground .
when they hatch , the male carries the tadpoles around in brood pouches on his hind legs .
the aquatic surinam toad (" pipa pipa ") raises its young in pores on its back where they remain until metamorphosis .
the granular poison frog (" oophaga granulifera ") is typical of a number of tree frogs in the poison dart frog family dendrobatidae .
its eggs are laid on the forest floor and when they hatch , the tadpoles are carried one by one on the back of an adult to a suitable water-filled crevice such as the axil of a leaf or the rosette of a bromeliad .
the female visits the nursery sites regularly and deposits unfertilised eggs in the water and these are consumed by the tadpoles .
with a few exceptions , adult amphibians are predators , feeding on virtually anything that moves that they can swallow .
the diet mostly consists of small prey that do not move too fast such as beetles , caterpillars , earthworms and spiders .
the sirens (" siren spp .")
often ingest aquatic plant material with the invertebrates on which they feed and a brazilian tree frog (" xenohyla truncata ") includes a large quantity of fruit in its diet .
the mexican burrowing toad (" rhinophrynus dorsalis ") has a specially adapted tongue for picking up ants and termites .
it projects it with the tip foremost whereas other frogs flick out the rear part first , their tongues being hinged at the front .
food is mostly selected by sight , even in conditions of dim light .
movement of the prey triggers a feeding response .
frogs have been caught on fish hooks baited with red flannel and green frogs (" rana clamitans ") have been found with stomachs full of elm seeds that they had seen floating past .
toads , salamanders and caecilians also use smell to detect prey .
this response is mostly secondary because salamanders have been observed to remain stationary near odoriferous prey but only feed if it moves .
cave-dwelling amphibians normally hunt by smell .
some salamanders seem to have learned to recognize immobile prey when it has no smell , even in complete darkness .
amphibians usually swallow food whole but may chew it lightly first to subdue it .
they typically have small hinged pedicellate teeth , a feature unique to amphibians .
the base and crown of these are composed of dentine separated by an uncalcified layer and they are replaced at intervals .
salamanders , caecilians and some frogs have one or two rows of teeth in both jaws , but some frogs (" rana spp .")
lack teeth in the lower jaw , and toads (" bufo spp .")
have no teeth .
in many amphibians there are also vomerine teeth attached to a facial bone in the roof of the mouth .
the tiger salamander (" ambystoma tigrinum ") is typical of the frogs and salamanders that hide under cover ready to ambush unwary invertebrates .
others amphibians , such as the " bufo spp ."
toads , actively search for prey , while the argentine horned frog (" ceratophrys ornata ") lures inquisitive prey closer by raising its hind feet over its back and vibrating its yellow toes .
among leaf litter frogs in panama , frogs that actively hunt prey have narrow mouths and are slim , often brightly coloured and toxic , while ambushers have wide mouths and are broad and well-camouflaged .
caecilians do not flick their tongues , but catch their prey by grabbing it with their slightly backward-pointing teeth .
the struggles of the prey and further jaw movements work it inwards and the caecilian usually retreats into its burrow .
the subdued prey is gulped down whole .
when they are newly hatched , frog larvae feed on the yolk of the egg .
when this is exhausted some move on to feed on bacteria , algal crusts , detritus and raspings from submerged plants .
water is drawn in through their mouths , which are usually at the bottom of their heads , and passes through branchial food traps between their mouths and their gills where fine particles are trapped in mucus and filtered out .
others have specialised mouthparts consisting of a horny beak edged by several rows of labial teeth .
they scrape and bite food of many kinds as well as stirring up the bottom sediment , filtering out larger particles with the papillae around their mouths .
some , such as the spadefoot toads , have strong biting jaws and are carnivorous or even cannibalistic .
the calls made by caecilians and salamanders are limited to occasional soft squeaks , grunts or hisses and have not been much studied .
a clicking sound sometimes produced by caecilians may be a means of orientation , as in bats , or a form of communication .
most salamanders are considered voiceless , but the california giant salamander (" dicamptodon ensatus ") has vocal cords and can produce a rattling or barking sound .
some species of salamander emit a quiet squeak or yelp if attacked .
frogs are much more vocal , especially during the breeding season when they use their voices to attract mates .
the presence of a particular species in an area may be more easily discerned by its characteristic call than by a fleeting glimpse of the animal itself .
in most species , the sound is produced by expelling air from the lungs over the vocal cords into an air sac or sacs in the throat or at the corner of the mouth .
this may distend like a balloon and acts as a resonator , helping to transfer the sound to the atmosphere , or the water at times when the animal is submerged .
the main vocalisation is the male 's loud advertisement call which seeks to both encourage a female to approach and discourage other males from intruding on its territory .
this call is modified to a quieter courtship call on the approach of a female or to a more aggressive version if a male intruder draws near .
calling carries the risk of attracting predators and involves the expenditure of much energy .
other calls include those given by a female in response to the advertisement call and a release call given by a male or female during unwanted attempts at amplexus .
when a frog is attacked , a distress or fright call is emitted , often resembling a scream .
the usually nocturnal cuban tree frog (" osteopilus septentrionalis ") produces a rain call when there is rainfall during daylight hours .
little is known of the territorial behaviour of caecilians , but some frogs and salamanders defend home ranges .
these are usually feeding , breeding or sheltering sites .
males normally exhibit such behaviour though in some species , females and even juveniles are also involved .
although in many frog species , females are larger than males , this is not the case in most species where males are actively involved in territorial defence .
some of these have specific adaptations such as enlarged teeth for biting or spines on the chest , arms or thumbs .
in salamanders , defence of a territory involves adopting an aggressive posture and if necessary attacking the intruder .
this may involve snapping , chasing and sometimes biting , occasionally causing the loss of a tail .
the behaviour of red back salamanders (" plethodon cinereus ") has been much studied .
90 % of marked individuals that were later recaptured were within a metre ( yard ) of their original daytime retreat under a log or rock .
a similar proportion , when moved experimentally a distance of , found their way back to their home base .
the salamanders left odour marks around their territories which averaged in size and were sometimes inhabited by a male and female pair .
these deterred the intrusion of others and delineated the boundaries between neighbouring areas .
much of their behaviour seemed stereotyped and did not involve any actual contact between individuals .
an aggressive posture involved raising the body off the ground and glaring at the opponent who often turned away submissively .
if the intruder persisted , a biting lunge was usually launched at either the tail region or the naso-labial grooves .
damage to either of these areas can reduce the fitness of the rival , either because of the need to regenerate tissue or because it impairs its ability to detect food .
in frogs , male territorial behaviour is often observed at breeding locations ; calling is both an announcement of ownership of part of this resource and an advertisement call to potential mates .
in general , a deeper voice represents a heavier and more powerful individual , and this may be sufficient to prevent intrusion by smaller males .
much energy is used in the vocalization and it takes a toll on the territory holder who may be displaced by a fitter rival if he tires .
there is a tendency for males to tolerate the holders of neighbouring territories while vigorously attacking unknown intruders .
holders of territories have a " home advantage " and usually come off better in an encounter between two similar-sized frogs .
if threats are insufficient , chest to chest tussles may take place .
fighting methods include pushing and shoving , deflating the opponent 's vocal sac , seizing him by the head , jumping on his back , biting , chasing , splashing , and ducking him under the water .
amphibians have soft bodies with thin skins , and lack claws , defensive armour , or spines .
nevertheless , they have evolved various defence mechanisms to keep themselves alive .
the first line of defence in salamanders and frogs is the mucous secretion that they produce .
this keeps their skin moist and makes them slippery and difficult to grip .
the secretion is often sticky and distasteful or toxic .
snakes have been observed yawning and gaping when trying to swallow african clawed frogs (" xenopus laevis "), which gives the frogs an opportunity to escape .
caecilians have been little studied in this respect , but the cayenne caecilian (" typhlonectes compressicauda ") produces toxic mucus that has killed predatory fish in a feeding experiment in brazil .
in some salamanders , the skin is poisonous .
the rough-skinned newt (" taricha granulosa ") from north america and other members of its genus contain the neurotoxin tetrodotoxin ( ttx ), the most toxic non-protein substance known and almost identical to that produced by pufferfish .
handling the newts does not cause harm , but ingestion of even the most minute amounts of the skin is deadly .
in feeding trials , fish , frogs , reptiles , birds and mammals were all found to be susceptible .
the only predators with some tolerance to the poison are certain populations of common garter snake (" thamnophis sirtalis ").
in locations where both snake and salamander co-exist , the snakes have developed immunity through genetic changes and they feed on the amphibians with impunity .
coevolution occurs with the newt increasing its toxic capabilities at the same rate as the snake further develops its immunity .
some frogs and toads are toxic , the main poison glands being at the side of the neck and under the warts on the back .
these regions are presented to the attacking animal and their secretions may be foul-tasting or cause various physical or neurological symptoms .
altogether , over 200 toxins have been isolated from the limited number of amphibian species that have been investigated .
poisonous species often use bright colouring to warn potential predators of their toxicity .
these warning colours tend to be red or yellow combined with black , with the fire salamander (" salamandra salamandra ") being an example .
once a predator has sampled one of these , it is likely to remember the colouration next time it encounters a similar animal .
in some species , such as the fire-bellied toad (" bombina spp .
"), the warning colouration is on the belly and these animals adopt a defensive pose when attacked , exhibiting their bright colours to the predator .
the frog " allobates zaparo " is not poisonous , but mimics the appearance of other toxic species in its locality , a strategy that may deceive predators .
many amphibians are nocturnal and hide during the day , thereby avoiding diurnal predators that hunt by sight .
other amphibians use camouflage to avoid being detected .
they have various colourings such as mottled browns , greys and olives to blend into the background .
some salamanders adopt defensive poses when faced by a potential predator such as the north american northern short-tailed shrew (" blarina brevicauda ").
their bodies writhe and they raise and lash their tails which makes it difficult for the predator to avoid contact with their poison-producing granular glands .
a few salamanders will autotomise their tails when attacked , sacrificing this part of their anatomy to enable them to escape .
the tail may have a constriction at its base to allow it to be easily detached .
the tail is regenerated later , but the energy cost to the animal of replacing it is significant .
some frogs and toads inflate themselves to make themselves look large and fierce , and some spadefoot toads (" pelobates spp ") scream and leap towards the attacker .
giant salamanders of the genus " andrias ", as well as ceratophrine and " pyxicephalus " frogs possess sharp teeth and are capable of drawing blood with a defensive bite .
the blackbelly salamander (" desmognathus quadramaculatus ") can bite an attacking common garter snake (" thamnophis sirtalis ") two or three times its size on the head and often manages to escape .
in amphibians , there is evidence of habituation , associative learning through both classical and instrumental learning , and discrimination abilities .
in one experiment , when offered live fruit flies (" drosophila virilis "), salamanders choose the larger of 1 vs 2 and 2 vs 3 .
frogs can distinguish between low numbers ( 1 vs 2 , 2 vs 3 , but not 3 vs 4 ) and large numbers ( 3 vs 6 , 4 vs 8 , but not 4 vs 6 ) of prey .
this is irrespective of other characteristics , i . e .
surface area , volume , weight and movement , although discrimination among large numbers may be based on surface area .
dramatic declines in amphibian populations , including population crashes and mass localized extinction , have been noted since the late 1000s from locations all over the world , and amphibian declines are thus perceived to be one of the most critical threats to global biodiversity .
in 2000 , the international union for conservation of nature ( iucn ) reported stating that currently birds , mammals , and amphibians extinction rates were at minimum 40 times greater than natural extinction ratespossibly 1 , 020 times higher .
in 2000 there were believed to be 4 , 030 species of amphibians that depended on water at some stage during their life cycle .
of these , 1 , 300 ( 30 . 6 %) were considered to be threatened and this figure is likely to be an underestimate because it excludes 1 , 400 species for which there was insufficient data to assess their status .
a number of causes are believed to be involved , including habitat destruction and modification , over-exploitation , pollution , introduced species , climate change , endocrine-disrupting pollutants , destruction of the ozone layer ( ultraviolet radiation has shown to be especially damaging to the skin , eyes , and eggs of amphibians ), and diseases like chytridiomycosis .
however , many of the causes of amphibian declines are still poorly understood , and are a topic of ongoing discussion .
with their complex reproductive needs and permeable skins , amphibians are often considered to be ecological indicators .
in many terrestrial ecosystems , they constitute one of the largest parts of the vertebrate biomass .
any decline in amphibian numbers will affect the patterns of predation .
the loss of carnivorous species near the top of the food chain will upset the delicate ecosystem balance and may cause dramatic increases in opportunistic species .
in the middle east , a growing appetite for eating frog legs and the consequent gathering of them for food was linked to an increase in mosquitoes .
predators that feed on amphibians are affected by their decline .
the western terrestrial garter snake (" thamnophis elegans ") in california is largely aquatic and depends heavily on two species of frog that are decreasing in numbers , the yosemite toad (" bufo canorus ") and the mountain yellow-legged frog (" rana muscosa "), putting the snake 's future at risk .
if the snake were to become scarce , this would affect birds of prey and other predators that feed on it .
meanwhile , in the ponds and lakes , fewer frogs means fewer tadpoles .
these normally play an important role in controlling the growth of algae and also forage on detritus that accumulates as sediment on the bottom .
a reduction in the number of tadpoles may lead to an overgrowth of algae , resulting in depletion of oxygen in the water when the algae later die and decompose .
aquatic invertebrates and fish might then die and there would be unpredictable ecological consequences .
a global strategy to stem the crisis was released in 2000 in the form of the amphibian conservation action plan .
developed by over eighty leading experts in the field , this call to action details what would be required to curtail amphibian declines and extinctions over the following five years and how much this would cost .
the amphibian specialist group of the iucn is spearheading efforts to implement a comprehensive global strategy for amphibian conservation .
amphibian ark is an organization that was formed to implement the ex-situ conservation recommendations of this plan , and they have been working with zoos and aquaria around the world , encouraging them to create assurance colonies of threatened amphibians .
one such project is the panama amphibian rescue and conservation project that built on existing conservation efforts in panama to create a country-wide response to the threat of chytridiomycosis .
alaska
alaska () is a u . s . state located in the northwest extremity of north america .
the canadian administrative divisions of british columbia and yukon border the state to the east , its most extreme western part is attu island , and it has a maritime border with russia to the west across the bering strait .
to the north are the chukchi and beaufort seasthe southern parts of the arctic ocean .
the pacific ocean lies to the south and southwest .
it is the largest state in the united states by area and the seventh largest subnational division in the world .
in addition , it is the 3rd least populous and the most sparsely populated of the 50 united states ; nevertheless , it is by far the most populous territory located mostly north of the 60th parallel in north america , its population ( the total estimated at 700 , 400 by the u . s . census bureau in 2000 ) more than quadrupling the combined populations of northern canada and greenland .
approximately half of alaska 's residents live within the anchorage metropolitan area .
alaska 's economy is dominated by the fishing , natural gas , and oil industries , resources which it has in abundance .
military bases and tourism are also a significant part of the economy .
the united states purchased alaska from the russian empire on march 30 , 1000 , for 7 . 2million u . s . dollars at approximately two cents per acre ($ 4 . 70/km ).
the area went through several administrative changes before becoming organized as a territory on may 10 , 1000 .
it was admitted as the 40th state of the u . s . on january 3 , 1000 .
the name " alaska " () was introduced in the russian colonial period when it was used to refer to the peninsula .
it was derived from an aleut , or unangam idiom , which figuratively refers to the mainland of alaska .
literally , it means " object to which the action of the sea is directed ".
alaska is the northernmost and westernmost state in the united states and has the most easterly longitude in the united states because the aleutian islands extend into the eastern hemisphere .
alaska is the only non-contiguous u . s . state on continental north america ; about of british columbia ( canada ) separates alaska from washington .
it is technically part of the continental u . s ., but is sometimes not included in colloquial use ; alaska is not part of the contiguous u . s ., often called " the lower 40 ".
the capital city , juneau , is situated on the mainland of the north american continent but is not connected by road to the rest of the north american highway system .
the state is bordered by yukon and british columbia in canada , to the east , the gulf of alaska and the pacific ocean to the south and southwest , the bering sea , bering strait , and chukchi sea to the west and the arctic ocean to the north .
alaska 's territorial waters touch russia 's territorial waters in the bering strait , as the russian big diomede island and alaskan little diomede island are only apart .
alaska has a longer coastline than all the other u . s . states combined .
alaska is the largest state in the united states by total area at , over twice the size of texas , the next largest state .
alaska is larger than all but 10 sovereign countries .
counting territorial waters , alaska is larger than the combined area of the next three largest states : texas , california , and montana .
it is also larger than the combined area of the 20 smallest u . s . states .
there are no officially defined borders demarcating the various regions of alaska , but there are six widely accepted regions :
the most populous region of alaska , containing anchorage , the matanuska-susitna valley and the kenai peninsula .
rural , mostly unpopulated areas south of the alaska range and west of the wrangell mountains also fall within the definition of south central , as do the prince william sound area and the communities of cordova and valdez .
also referred to as the panhandle or inside passage , this is the region of alaska closest to the rest of the united states .
as such , this was where most of the initial non-indigenous settlement occurred in the years following the alaska purchase .
the region is dominated by the alexander archipelago as well as the tongass national forest , the largest national forest in the united states .
it contains the state capital juneau , the former capital sitka , and ketchikan , at one time alaska 's largest city .
the alaska marine highway provides a vital surface transportation link throughout the area , as only three communities ( haines , hyder and skagway ) enjoy direct connections to the contiguous north american road system .
officially designated in 1000 .
the interior is the largest region of alaska ; much of it is uninhabited wilderness .
fairbanks is the only large city in the region .
denali national park and preserve is located here .
" denali " is the highest mountain in north america .
southwest alaska is a sparsely inhabited region stretching some inland from the bering sea .
most of the population lives along the coast .
kodiak island is also located in southwest .
the massive yukonkuskokwim delta , one of the largest river deltas in the world , is here .
portions of the alaska peninsula are considered part of southwest , with the remaining portions included with the aleutian islands ( see below ).
the north slope is mostly tundra peppered with small villages .
the area is known for its massive reserves of crude oil , and contains both the national petroleum reservealaska and the prudhoe bay oil field .
barrow , the northernmost city in the united states , is located here .
the northwest arctic area , anchored by kotzebue and also containing the kobuk river valley , is often regarded as being part of this region .
however , the respective inupiat of the north slope and of the northwest arctic seldom consider themselves to be one people .
more than 300 small volcanic islands make up this chain , which stretches over into the pacific ocean .
some of these islands fall in the eastern hemisphere , but the international date line was drawn west of 100 to keep the whole state , and thus the entire north american continent , within the same legal day .
two of the islands , attu and kiska , were occupied by japanese forces during world war ii .
with its myriad islands , alaska has nearly of tidal shoreline .
the aleutian islands chain extends west from the southern tip of the alaska peninsula .
many active volcanoes are found in the aleutians and in coastal regions .
unimak island , for example , is home to mount shishaldin , which is an occasionally smoldering volcano that rises to above the north pacific .
it is the most perfect volcanic cone on earth , even more symmetrical than japan 's mount fuji .
the chain of volcanoes extends to mount spurr , west of anchorage on the mainland .
geologists have identified alaska as part of wrangellia , a large region consisting of multiple states and canadian provinces in the pacific northwest , which is actively undergoing continent building .
one of the world 's largest tides occurs in turnagain arm , just south of anchorage tidal differences can be more than .
alaska has more than three million lakes .
marshlands and wetland permafrost cover ( mostly in northern , western and southwest flatlands ).
glacier ice covers some of land and of tidal zone .
the bering glacier complex near the southeastern border with yukon covers alone .
with over 100 , 000 glaciers , alaska has half of all in the world .
according to an october 1000 report by the united states bureau of land management , approximately 60 % of alaska is owned and managed by the u . s . federal government as public lands , including a multitude of national forests , national parks , and national wildlife refuges .
of these , the bureau of land management manages , or 20 . 8 % of the state .
the arctic national wildlife refuge is managed by the united states fish and wildlife service .
it is the world 's largest wildlife refuge , comprising .
of the remaining land area , the state of alaska owns , its entitlement under the alaska statehood act .
a portion of that acreage is occasionally ceded to organized boroughs , under the statutory provisions pertaining to newly formed boroughs .
smaller portions are set aside for rural subdivisions and other homesteading-related opportunities .
these are not very popular due to the often remote and roadless locations .
the university of alaska , as a land grant university , also owns substantial acreage which it manages independently .
another are owned by 10 regional , and scores of local , native corporations created under the alaska native claims settlement act ( ancsa ) of 1000 .
regional native corporation doyon , limited often promotes itself as the largest private landowner in alaska in advertisements and other communications .
provisions of ancsa allowing the corporations ' land holdings to be sold on the open market starting in 1000 were repealed before they could take effect .
effectively , the corporations hold title ( including subsurface title in many cases , a privilege denied to individual alaskans ) but cannot sell the land .
individual native allotments can be and are sold on the open market , however .
various private interests own the remaining land , totaling about one percent of the state .
alaska is , by a large margin , the state with the smallest percentage of private land ownership when native corporation holdings are excluded .
the climate in southeast alaska is a mid-latitude oceanic climate ( kppen climate classification : " cfb ") in the southern sections and a subarctic oceanic climate ( kppen " cfc ") in the northern parts .
on an annual basis , southeast is both the wettest and warmest part of alaska with milder temperatures in the winter and high precipitation throughout the year .
juneau averages over of precipitation a year , and ketchikan averages over .
this is also the only region in alaska in which the average daytime high temperature is above freezing during the winter months .
the climate of anchorage and south central alaska is mild by alaskan standards due to the region 's proximity to the seacoast .
while the area gets less rain than southeast alaska , it gets more snow , and days tend to be clearer .
on average , anchorage receives of precipitation a year , with around of snow , although there are areas in the south central which receive far more snow .
it is a subarctic climate () due to its brief , cool summers .
the climate of western alaska is determined in large part by the bering sea and the gulf of alaska .
it is a subarctic oceanic climate in the southwest and a continental subarctic climate farther north .
the temperature is somewhat moderate considering how far north the area is .
this region has a tremendous amount of variety in precipitation .
an area stretching from the northern side of the seward peninsula to the kobuk river valley ( i . e ., the region around kotzebue sound ) is technically a desert , with portions receiving less than of precipitation annually .
on the other extreme , some locations between dillingham and bethel average around of precipitation .
the climate of the interior of alaska is subarctic .
some of the highest and lowest temperatures in alaska occur around the area near fairbanks .
the summers may have temperatures reaching into the 90s f ( the low-to-mid 30s c ), while in the winter , the temperature can fall below .
precipitation is sparse in the interior , often less than a year , but what precipitation falls in the winter tends to stay the entire winter .
the highest and lowest recorded temperatures in alaska are both in the interior .
the highest is in fort yukon ( which is just inside the arctic circle ) on june 20 , 1000 , making alaska tied with hawaii as the state with the lowest high temperature in the united states .
the lowest official alaska temperature is in prospect creek on january 20 , 1000 , one degree above the lowest temperature recorded in continental north america ( in snag , yukon , canada ).
the climate in the extreme north of alaska is arctic () with long , very cold winters and short , cool summers .
even in july , the average low temperature in barrow is .
precipitation is light in this part of alaska , with many places averaging less than per year , mostly as snow which stays on the ground almost the entire year .
numerous indigenous peoples occupied alaska for thousands of years before the arrival of european peoples to the area .
linguistic and dna studies done here have provided evidence for the settlement of north america by way of the bering land bridge .
the tlingit people developed a society with a matrilineal kinship system of property inheritance and descent in what is today southeast alaska , along with parts of british columbia and the yukon .
also in southeast were the haida , now well known for their unique arts .
the tsimshian people came to alaska from british columbia in 1000 , when president grover cleveland , and later the u . s . congress , granted them permission to settle on annette island and found the town of metlakatla .
all three of these peoples , as well as other indigenous peoples of the pacific northwest coast , experienced smallpox outbreaks from the late 10th through the mid-10th century , with the most devastating epidemics occurring in the 1000s and 1000s , resulting in high fatalities and social disruption .
the aleutian islands are still home to the aleut people 's seafaring society , although they were the first native alaskans to be exploited by russians .
western and southwestern alaska are home to the yup ' ik , while their cousins the alutiiq ~ sugpiaq lived in what is now southcentral alaska .
the gwich ' in people of the northern interior region are athabaskan and primarily known today for their dependence on the caribou within the much-contested arctic national wildlife refuge .
the north slope and little diomede island are occupied by the widespread inupiat people .
some researchers believe that the first russian settlement in alaska was established in the 10th century .
according to this hypothesis , in 1000 several koches of semyon dezhnyov 's expedition came ashore in alaska by storm and founded this settlement .
this hypothesis is based on the testimony of chukchi geographer nikolai daurkin , who had visited alaska in 10000000 and who had reported on a village on the kheuveren river , populated by " bearded men " who " pray to the icons ".
some modern researchers associate kheuveren with koyuk river .
the first european vessel to reach alaska is generally held to be the " st . gabriel " under the authority of the surveyor m . s . gvozdev and assistant navigator i . fyodorov on august 20 , 1000 , during an expedition of siberian cossak a . f . shestakov and belorussian explorer dmitry pavlutsky ( 10000000 ).
another european contact with alaska occurred in 1000 , when vitus bering led an expedition for the russian navy aboard the " st . peter ".
after his crew returned to russia with sea otter pelts judged to be the finest fur in the world , small associations of fur traders began to sail from the shores of siberia toward the aleutian islands .
the first permanent european settlement was founded in 1000 .
between 1000 and 1000 , spain sent several expeditions to alaska in order to assert its claim over the pacific northwest .
in 1000 a spanish settlement and fort were built in nootka sound .
these expeditions gave names to places such as valdez , bucareli sound , and cordova .
later , the russian-american company carried out an expanded colonization program during the early-to-mid - 10th century .
sitka , renamed new archangel from 1000 to 1000 , on baranof island in the alexander archipelago in what is now southeast alaska , became the capital of russian america .
it remained the capital after the colony was transferred to the united states .
the russians never fully colonized alaska , and the colony was never very profitable .
evidence of russian settlement in names and churches survive throughout southeast alaska .
william h . seward , the united states secretary of state , negotiated the alaska purchase ( also known as seward 's folly ) with the russians in 1000 for $ 7 . 2million .
alaska was loosely governed by the military initially , and was administered as a district starting in 1000 , with a governor appointed by the president of the united states .
a federal district court was headquartered in sitka .
for most of alaska 's first decade under the united states flag , sitka was the only community inhabited by american settlers .
they organized a " provisional city government ," which was alaska 's first municipal government , but not in a legal sense .
legislation allowing alaskan communities to legally incorporate as cities did not come about until 1000 , and home rule for cities was extremely limited or unavailable until statehood took effect in 1000 .
starting in the 1000s and stretching in some places to the early 1000s , gold rushes in alaska and the nearby yukon territory brought thousands of miners and settlers to alaska .
alaska was officially incorporated as an organized territory in 1000 .
alaska 's capital , which had been in sitka until 1000 , was moved north to juneau .
construction of the alaska governor 's mansion began that same year .
european immigrants from norway and sweden also settled in southeast alaska , where they entered the fishing and logging industries .
during world war ii , the aleutian islands campaign focused on the three outer aleutian islands attu , agattu and kiska that were invaded by japanese troops and occupied between june 1000 and august 1000 .
during the occupation , one alaskan civilian was killed by japanese troops and nearly fifty were interned in japan , where about half of them died .
unalaska/dutch harbor became a significant base for the united states army air forces and navy submariners .
the united states lend-lease program involved the flying of american warplanes through canada to fairbanks and then nome ; soviet pilots took possession of these aircraft , ferrying them to fight the german invasion of the soviet union .
the construction of military bases contributed to the population growth of some alaskan cities .
statehood for alaska was an important cause of james wickersham early in his tenure as a congressional delegate .
decades later , the statehood movement gained its first real momentum following a territorial referendum in 1000 .
the alaska statehood committee and alaska 's constitutional convention would soon follow .
statehood supporters also found themselves fighting major battles against political foes , mostly in the u . s . congress but also within alaska .
statehood was approved by congress on july 7 , 1000 .
alaska was officially proclaimed a state on january 3 , 1000 .
in 1000 , the census bureau reported alaska 's population as 70 . 2 % white , 3 % black , and 10 . 8 % american indian and alaska native .
on march 20 , 1000 , the massive good friday earthquake killed 100 people and destroyed several villages and portions of large coastal communities , mainly by the resultant tsunamis and landslides .
it was the second-most-powerful earthquake in the recorded history of the world , with a moment magnitude of 9 . 2 .
it was over one thousand times more powerful than the 1000 san francisco earthquake .
the time of day ( 5:30pm ), time of year and location of the epicenter were all cited as factors in potentially sparing thousands of lives , particularly in anchorage .
the 1000 discovery of oil at prudhoe bay and the 1000 completion of the trans-alaska pipeline system led to an oil boom .
royalty revenues from oil have funded large state budgets from 1000 onward .
that same year , not coincidentally , alaska repealed its state income tax .
in 1000 , the " exxon valdez " hit a reef in the prince william sound , spilling over of crude oil over of coastline .
today , the battle between philosophies of development and conservation is seen in the contentious debate over oil drilling in the arctic national wildlife refuge and the proposed pebble mine .
the alaska heritage resources survey ( ahrs ) is a restricted inventory of all reported historic and prehistoric sites within the state of alaska ; it is maintained by the office of history and archaeology .
the survey 's inventory of cultural resources includes objects , structures , buildings , sites , districts , and travel ways , with a general provision that they are over 50 years old .
as of january 30 , 2000 , over 30 , 000 sites have been reported .
the united states census bureau estimates that the population of alaska was 700 , 400 on july 1 , 2000 , a 3 . 90 % increase since the 2000 united states census .
in 2000 , alaska ranked as the 40th state by population , ahead of north dakota , vermont , and wyoming ( and washington , d . c .) alaska is the least densely populated state , and one of the most sparsely populated areas in the world , at , with the next state , wyoming , at .
alaska is the largest u . s . state by area , and the tenth wealthiest ( per capita income ).
as of november 2000 , the state 's unemployment rate was 6 . 6 %.
according to the 2000 united states census , alaska had a population of 700 , 200 .
in terms of race and ethnicity , the state was 60 . 7 % white ( 60 . 1 % non-hispanic white ), 10 . 8 % american indian and alaska native , 5 . 4 % asian , 3 . 3 % black or african american , 1 . 0 % native hawaiian and other pacific islander , 1 . 6 % from some other race , and 7 . 3 % from two or more races .
hispanics or latinos of any race made up 5 . 5 % of the population .
, 50 . 7 % of alaska 's population younger than one year of age belonged to minority groups ( i . e ., did not have two parents of non-hispanic white ancestry ).
according to the 2000 american community survey , 80 . 4 % of people over the age of five speak only english at home .
about 3 . 5 % speak spanish at home .
about 2 . 2 % speak another indo-european language at home and about 4 . 3 % speak an asian language ( including tagalog ) at home .
about 5 . 3 % speak other languages at home .
the alaska native language center at the university of alaska fairbanks claims that at least 20 alaskan native languages exist and there are also some languages with different dialects .
most of alaska 's native languages belong to either the eskimoaleut or na-dene language families however some languages are thought to be isolates ( e . g .
haida ) or have not yet been classified ( e . g .
tsimshianic ).
a total of 5 . 2 % of alaskans speak one of the state 's 20 indigenous languages , known locally as " native languages ".
in october 2000 , the governor of alaska signed a bill declaring the state 's 20 indigenous languages as official languages .
this bill gave the languages symbolic recognition as official languages , though they have not been adopted for official use within the government .
the 20 languages that were included in the bill are :
according to statistics collected by the association of religion data archives from 2000 , about 30 % of alaska residents were members of religious congregations .
100 , 900 people identified as evangelical protestants , 50 , 800 as roman catholic , and 30 , 500 as mainline protestants .
roughly 4 % are mormon , 0 . 5 % are jewish , 1 % are muslim , 0 . 5 % are buddhist , and 0 . 5 % are hindu .
the largest religious denominations in alaska were the catholic church with 50 , 800 adherents , non-denominational evangelical protestants with 30 , 070 adherents , the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints with 30 , 100 adherents , and the southern baptist convention with 10 , 800 adherents .
alaska has been identified , along with pacific northwest states washington and oregon , as being the least religious states of the usa , in terms of church membership .
in 1000 , the first russian orthodox church was established in kodiak .
intermarriage with alaskan natives helped the russian immigrants integrate into society .
as a result , an increasing number of russian orthodox churches gradually became established within alaska .
alaska also has the largest quaker population ( by percentage ) of any state .
in 2000 there were 6 , 000 jews in alaska ( for whom observance of halakha may pose special problems ).
alaskan hindus often share venues and celebrations with members of other asian religious communities , including sikhs and jains .
estimates for the number of muslims in alaska range from 2 , 000 to 5 , 000 .
the islamic community center of anchorage began efforts in the late 1000s to construct a mosque in anchorage .
they broke ground on a building in south anchorage in 2000 and were nearing completion in late 2000 .
when completed , the mosque will be the first in the state and one of the northernmost mosques in the world .
the 2000 gross state product was $ 40 . 9billion , 40th in the nation .
its per capita personal income for 2000 was $ 40 , 040 , ranking 10th in the nation .
according to a 2000 study by phoenix marketing international , alaska had the fifth-largest number of millionaires per capita in the united states , with a ratio of 6 . 70 percent .
the oil and gas industry dominates the alaskan economy , with more than 80 % of the state 's revenues derived from petroleum extraction .
alaska 's main export product ( excluding oil and natural gas ) is seafood , primarily salmon , cod , pollock and crab .
agriculture represents a very small fraction of the alaskan economy .
agricultural production is primarily for consumption within the state and includes nursery stock , dairy products , vegetables , and livestock .
manufacturing is limited , with most foodstuffs and general goods imported from elsewhere .
employment is primarily in government and industries such as natural resource extraction , shipping , and transportation .
military bases are a significant component of the economy in the fairbanks north star , anchorage and kodiak island boroughs , as well as kodiak .
federal subsidies are also an important part of the economy , allowing the state to keep taxes low .
its industrial outputs are crude petroleum , natural gas , coal , gold , precious metals , zinc and other mining , seafood processing , timber and wood products .
there is also a growing service and tourism sector .
tourists have contributed to the economy by supporting local lodging .
alaska has vast energy resources , although its oil reserves have been largely depleted .
major oil and gas reserves were found in the alaska north slope ( ans ) and cook inlet basins , but according to the energy information administration , by february 2000 alaska had fallen to fourth place in the nation in crude oil production after texas , north dakota , and california .
prudhoe bay on alaska 's north slope is still the second highest-yielding oil field in the united states , typically producing about , although by early 2000 north dakota 's bakken formation was producing over .
prudhoe bay was the largest conventional oil field ever discovered in north america , but was much smaller than canada 's enormous athabasca oil sands field , which by 2000 was producing about of unconventional oil , and had hundreds of years of producible reserves at that rate .
the trans-alaska pipeline can transport and pump up to of crude oil per day , more than any other crude oil pipeline in the united states .
additionally , substantial coal deposits are found in alaska 's bituminous , sub-bituminous , and lignite coal basins .
the united states geological survey estimates that there are of undiscovered , technically recoverable gas from natural gas hydrates on the alaskan north slope .
alaska also offers some of the highest hydroelectric power potential in the country from its numerous rivers .
large swaths of the alaskan coastline offer wind and geothermal energy potential as well .
alaska 's economy depends heavily on increasingly expensive diesel fuel for heating , transportation , electric power and light .
though wind and hydroelectric power are abundant and underdeveloped , proposals for statewide energy systems ( e . g .
with special low-cost electric interties ) were judged uneconomical ( at the time of the report , 2000 ) due to low ( less than 50/gal ) fuel prices , long distances and low population .
the cost of a gallon of gas in urban alaska today is usually 3000 higher than the national average ; prices in rural areas are generally significantly higher but vary widely depending on transportation costs , seasonal usage peaks , nearby petroleum development infrastructure and many other factors .
the alaska permanent fund is a constitutionally authorized appropriation of oil revenues , established by voters in 1000 to manage a surplus in state petroleum revenues from oil , largely in anticipation of the then recently constructed trans-alaska pipeline system .
the fund was originally proposed by governor keith miller on the eve of the 1000 prudhoe bay lease sale , out of fear that the legislature would spend the entire proceeds of the sale ( which amounted to $ 900 million ) at once .
it was later championed by governor jay hammond and kenai state representative hugh malone .
it has served as an attractive political prospect ever since , diverting revenues which would normally be deposited into the general fund .
the alaska constitution was written so as to discourage dedicating state funds for a particular purpose .
the permanent fund has become the rare exception to this , mostly due to the political climate of distrust existing during the time of its creation .
from its initial principal of $ 700 , 000 , the fund has grown to $ 50billion as a result of oil royalties and capital investment programs .
most if not all the principal is invested conservatively outside alaska .
this has led to frequent calls by alaskan politicians for the fund to make investments within alaska , though such a stance has never gained momentum .
starting in 1000 , dividends from the fund 's annual growth have been paid out each year to eligible alaskans , ranging from an initial $ 1 , 000 in 1000 ( equal to three years ' payout , as the distribution of payments was held up in a lawsuit over the distribution scheme ) to $ 3 , 200 in 2000 ( which included a one-time $ 1 , 200 " resource rebate ").
every year , the state legislature takes out 8 % from the earnings , puts 3 % back into the principal for inflation proofing , and the remaining 5 % is distributed to all qualifying alaskans .
to qualify for the permanent fund dividend , one must have lived in the state for a minimum of 10 months , maintain constant residency subject to allowable absences , and not be subject to court judgments or criminal convictions which fall under various disqualifying classifications or may subject the payment amount to civil garnishment .
the permanent fund is often considered to be one of the leading examples of a " basic income " policy in the world .
the cost of goods in alaska has long been higher than in the contiguous 40 states .
federal government employees , particularly united states postal service ( usps ) workers and active-duty military members , receive a cost of living allowance usually set at 20 % of base pay because , while the cost of living has gone down , it is still one of the highest in the country .
rural alaska suffers from extremely high prices for food and consumer goods compared to the rest of the country , due to the relatively limited transportation infrastructure .
due to the northern climate and short growing season , relatively little farming occurs in alaska .
most farms are in either the matanuska valley , about northeast of anchorage , or on the kenai peninsula , about southwest of anchorage .
the short 100-day growing season limits the crops that can be grown , but the long sunny summer days make for productive growing seasons .
the primary crops are potatoes , carrots , lettuce , and cabbage .
the tanana valley is another notable agricultural locus , especially the delta junction area , about southeast of fairbanks , with a sizable concentration of farms growing agronomic crops ; these farms mostly lie north and east of fort greely .
this area was largely set aside and developed under a state program spearheaded by hammond during his second term as governor .
delta-area crops consist predominately of barley and hay .
west of fairbanks lies another concentration of small farms catering to restaurants , the hotel and tourist industry , and community-supported agriculture .
alaskan agriculture has experienced a surge in growth of market gardeners , small farms and farmers ' markets in recent years , with the highest percentage increase ( 40 %) in the nation in growth in farmers ' markets in 2000 , compared to 10 % nationwide .
the peony industry has also taken off , as the growing season allows farmers to harvest during a gap in supply elsewhere in the world , thereby filling a niche in the flower market .
alaska , with no counties , lacks county fairs .
however , a small assortment of state and local fairs ( with the alaska state fair in palmer the largest ), are held mostly in the late summer .
the fairs are mostly located in communities with historic or current agricultural activity , and feature local farmers exhibiting produce in addition to more high-profile commercial activities such as carnival rides , concerts and food .
" alaska grown " is used as an agricultural slogan .
alaska has an abundance of seafood , with the primary fisheries in the bering sea and the north pacific .
seafood is one of the few food items that is often cheaper within the state than outside it .
many alaskans take advantage of salmon seasons to harvest portions of their household diet while fishing for subsistence , as well as sport .
this includes fish taken by hook , net or wheel .
hunting for subsistence , primarily caribou , moose , and dall sheep is still common in the state , particularly in remote bush communities .
an example of a traditional native food is akutaq , the eskimo ice cream , which can consist of reindeer fat , seal oil , dried fish meat and local berries .
alaska 's reindeer herding is concentrated on seward peninsula , where wild caribou can be prevented from mingling and migrating with the domesticated reindeer .
most food in alaska is transported into the state from " outside ", and shipping costs make food in the cities relatively expensive .
in rural areas , subsistence hunting and gathering is an essential activity because imported food is prohibitively expensive .
though most small towns and villages in alaska lie along the coastline , the cost of importing food to remote villages can be high , because of the terrain and difficult road conditions , which change dramatically , due to varying climate and precipitation changes .
the cost of transport can reach as high as 50 per pound ($ 1 . 10/kg ) or more in some remote areas , during the most difficult times , if these locations can be reached at all during such inclement weather and terrain conditions .
the cost of delivering a of milk is about $ 3 . 50 in many villages where per capita income can be $ 20 , 000 or less .
fuel cost per gallon is routinely 2000 higher than the continental united states average , with only hawaii having higher prices .
alaska has few road connections compared to the rest of the u . s .
the state 's road system covers a relatively small area of the state , linking the central population centers and the alaska highway , the principal route out of the state through canada .
the state capital , juneau , is not accessible by road , only a car ferry , which has spurred several debates over the decades about moving the capital to a city on the road system , or building a road connection from haines .
the western part of alaska has no road system connecting the communities with the rest of alaska .
one unique feature of the alaska highway system is the anton anderson memorial tunnel , an active alaska railroad tunnel recently upgraded to provide a paved roadway link with the isolated community of whittier on prince william sound to the seward highway about southeast of anchorage at portage .
at , the tunnel was the longest road tunnel in north america until 2000 .
the tunnel is the longest combination road and rail tunnel in north america .
built around 1000 , the alaska railroad ( arr ) played a key role in the development of alaska through the 20th century .
it links north pacific shipping through providing critical infrastructure with tracks that run from seward to interior alaska by way of south central alaska , passing through anchorage , eklutna , wasilla , talkeetna , denali , and fairbanks , with spurs to whittier , palmer and north pole .
the cities , towns , villages , and region served by arr tracks are known statewide as " the railbelt ".
in recent years , the ever-improving paved highway system began to eclipse the railroad 's importance in alaska 's economy .
the railroad played a vital role in alaska 's development , moving freight into alaska while transporting natural resources southward ( i . e ., coal from the usibelli coal mine near healy to seward and gravel from the matanuska valley to anchorage ).
it is well known for its summertime tour passenger service .
the alaska railroad was one of the last railroads in north america to use cabooses in regular service and still uses them on some gravel trains .
it continues to offer one of the last flag stop routes in the country .
a stretch of about of track along an area north of talkeetna remains inaccessible by road ; the railroad provides the only transportation to rural homes and cabins in the area .
until construction of the parks highway in the 1000s , the railroad provided the only land access to most of the region along its entire route .
in northern southeast alaska , the white pass and yukon route also partly runs through the state from skagway northwards into canada ( british columbia and yukon territory ), crossing the border at white pass summit .
this line is now mainly used by tourists , often arriving by cruise liner at skagway .
it was featured in the 1000 bbc television series " great little railways ."
the alaska rail network is not connected to outside .
in 2000 , the u . s . congress authorized $ 6million to study the feasibility of a rail link between alaska , canada , and the lower 40 .
alaska rail marine provides car float service between whittier and seattle .
many cities , towns and villages in the state do not have road or highway access ; the only modes of access involve travel by air , river , or the sea .
alaska 's well-developed state-owned ferry system ( known as the alaska marine highway ) serves the cities of southeast , the gulf coast and the alaska peninsula .
the ferries transport vehicles as well as passengers .
the system also operates a ferry service from bellingham , washington and prince rupert , british columbia in canada through the inside passage to skagway .
the inter-island ferry authority also serves as an important marine link for many communities in the prince of wales island region of southeast and works in concert with the alaska marine highway .
in recent years , cruise lines have created a summertime tourism market , mainly connecting the pacific northwest to southeast alaska and , to a lesser degree , towns along alaska 's gulf coast .
the population of ketchikan may rise by over 10 , 000 people on many days during the summer , as up to four large cruise ships at a time can dock , debarking thousands of passengers .
cities not served by road , sea , or river can be reached only by air , foot , dogsled , or snowmachine , accounting for alaska 's extremely well developed bush air servicesan alaskan novelty .
anchorage and , to a lesser extent fairbanks , is served by many major airlines .
because of limited highway access , air travel remains the most efficient form of transportation in and out of the state .
anchorage recently completed extensive remodeling and construction at ted stevens anchorage international airport to help accommodate the upsurge in tourism ( in 20000000 , alaska received almost 2 million visitors ).
regular flights to most villages and towns within the state that are commercially viable are challenging to provide , so they are heavily subsidized by the federal government through the essential air service program .
alaska airlines is the only major airline offering in-state travel with jet service ( sometimes in combination cargo and passenger boeing 700-400s ) from anchorage and fairbanks to regional hubs like bethel , nome , kotzebue , dillingham , kodiak , and other larger communities as well as to major southeast and alaska peninsula communities .
the bulk of remaining commercial flight offerings come from small regional commuter airlines such as ravn alaska , penair , and frontier flying service .
the smallest towns and villages must rely on scheduled or chartered bush flying services using general aviation aircraft such as the cessna caravan , the most popular aircraft in use in the state .
much of this service can be attributed to the alaska bypass mail program which subsidizes bulk mail delivery to alaskan rural communities .
the program requires 70 % of that subsidy to go to carriers who offer passenger service to the communities .
many communities have small air taxi services .
these operations originated from the demand for customized transport to remote areas .
perhaps the most quintessentially alaskan plane is the bush seaplane .
the world 's busiest seaplane base is lake hood , located next to ted stevens anchorage international airport , where flights bound for remote villages without an airstrip carry passengers , cargo , and many items from stores and warehouse clubs .
in 2000 alaska had the highest number of pilots per capita of any u . s . state .
another alaskan transportation method is the dogsled .
in modern times ( that is , any time after the mid-late 1000s ), dog mushing is more of a sport than a true means of transportation .
various races are held around the state , but the best known is the iditarod trail sled dog race , a trail from anchorage to nome ( although the distance varies from year to year , the official distance is set at ).
the race commemorates the famous 1000 serum run to nome in which mushers and dogs like togo and balto took much-needed medicine to the diphtheria-stricken community of nome when all other means of transportation had failed .
mushers from all over the world come to anchorage each march to compete for cash , prizes , and prestige .
the " serum run " is another sled dog race that more accurately follows the route of the famous 1000 relay , leaving from the community of nenana ( southwest of fairbanks ) to nome .
in areas not served by road or rail , primary transportation in summer is by all-terrain vehicle and in winter by snowmobile or " snow machine ," as it is commonly referred to in alaska .
alaska 's internet and other data transport systems are provided largely through the two major telecommunications companies : gci and alaska communications .
gci owns and operates what it calls the alaska united fiber optic system and as of late 2000 alaska communications advertised that it has " two fiber optic paths to the lower 40 and two more across alaska .
in january 2000 , it was reported that a $ 1 billion project to connect asia and rural alaska was being planned , aided in part by $ 300 million in stimulus from the federal government .
like all other u . s . states , alaska is governed as a republic , with three branches of government : an executive branch consisting of the governor of alaska and the other independently elected constitutional officers ; a legislative branch consisting of the alaska house of representatives and alaska senate ; and a judicial branch consisting of the alaska supreme court and lower courts .
the state of alaska employs approximately 10 , 000 people statewide .
the alaska legislature consists of a 40-member house of representatives and a 20-member senate .
senators serve four-year terms and house members two .
the governor of alaska serves four-year terms .
the lieutenant governor runs separately from the governor in the primaries , but during the general election , the nominee for governor and nominee for lieutenant governor run together on the same ticket .
alaska 's court system has four levels : the alaska supreme court , the alaska court of appeals , the superior courts and the district courts .
the superior and district courts are trial courts .
superior courts are courts of general jurisdiction , while district courts only hear certain types of cases , including misdemeanor criminal cases and civil cases valued up to $ 100 , 000 .
the supreme court and the court of appeals are appellate courts .
the court of appeals is required to hear appeals from certain lower-court decisions , including those regarding criminal prosecutions , juvenile delinquency , and habeas corpus .
the supreme court hears civil appeals and may in its discretion hear criminal appeals .
although in its early years of statehood alaska was a democratic state , since the early 1000s it has been characterized as republican-leaning .
local political communities have often worked on issues related to land use development , fishing , tourism , and individual rights .
alaska natives , while organized in and around their communities , have been active within the native corporations .
these have been given ownership over large tracts of land , which require stewardship .
alaska was formerly the only state in which possession of one ounce or less of marijuana in one 's home was completely legal under state law , though the federal law remains in force .
the state has an independence movement favoring a vote on secession from the united states , with the alaskan independence party .
six republicans and four democrats have served as governor of alaska .
in addition , republican governor wally hickel was elected to the office for a second term in 1000 after leaving the republican party and briefly joining the alaskan independence party ticket just long enough to be reelected .
he officially rejoined the republican party in 1000 .
alaska 's voter initiative making marijuana legal took effect on february 20 , 2000 , placing alaska alongside colorado and washington as the first three u . s . states where recreational marijuana is legal .
the new law means people over age 20 can consume small amounts of pot if they can find it .
there is a rather lengthy and involved application process , per alaska measure 2 ( 2000 ).
the first legal marijuana store opened in valdez in october 2000 .
to finance state government operations , alaska depends primarily on petroleum revenues and federal subsidies .
this allows it to have the lowest individual tax burden in the united states .
it is one of five states with no state sales tax , one of seven states that do not levy an individual income tax , and one of the two states that has neither .
the department of revenue tax division reports regularly on the state 's revenue sources .
the department also issues an annual summary of its operations , including new state laws that directly affect the tax division .
while alaska has no state sales tax , 80 municipalities collect a local sales tax , from 1 . 07 . 5 %, typically 30 %.
other local taxes levied include raw fish taxes , hotel , motel , and bed-and-breakfast ' bed ' taxes , severance taxes , liquor and tobacco taxes , gaming ( pull tabs ) taxes , tire taxes and fuel transfer taxes .
a part of the revenue collected from certain state taxes and license fees ( such as petroleum , aviation motor fuel , telephone cooperative ) is shared with municipalities in alaska .
fairbanks has one of the highest property taxes in the state as no sales or income taxes are assessed in the fairbanks north star borough ( fnsb ).
a sales tax for the fnsb has been voted on many times , but has yet to be approved , leading lawmakers to increase taxes dramatically on goods such as liquor and tobacco .
in 2000 the tax foundation ranked alaska as having the fourth most " business friendly " tax policy , behind only wyoming , south dakota , and nevada .
alaska regularly supports republicans in presidential elections and has done so since statehood .
republicans have won the state 's electoral college votes in all but one election that it has participated in ( 1000 ).
no state has voted for a democratic presidential candidate fewer times .
alaska was carried by democratic nominee lyndon b . johnson during his landslide election in 1000 , while the 1000 and 1000 elections were close .
since 1000 , however , republicans have carried the state by large margins .
in 2000 , republican john mccain defeated democrat barack obama in alaska , 50 . 40 % to 30 . 80 %.
mccain 's running mate was sarah palin , the state 's governor and the first alaskan on a major party ticket .
obama lost alaska again in 2000 , but he captured 40 % of the state 's vote in that election , making him the first democrat to do so since 1000 .
the alaska bush , central juneau , midtown and downtown anchorage , and the areas surrounding the university of alaska fairbanks campus and ester have been strongholds of the democratic party .
the matanuska-susitna borough , the majority of fairbanks ( including north pole and the military base ), and south anchorage typically have the strongest republican showing .
, well over half of all registered voters have chosen " non-partisan " or " undeclared " as their affiliation , despite recent attempts to close primaries to unaffiliated voters .
because of its population relative to other u . s . states , alaska has only one member in the u . s . house of representatives .
this seat is held by republican don young , who was re-elected to his 20st consecutive term in 2000 .
alaska 's at-large congressional district is one of the largest parliamentary constituencies in the world .
in 2000 , governor sarah palin became the first republican woman to run on a national ticket when she became john mccain 's running mate .
she continued to be a prominent national figure even after resigning from the governor 's job in july 2000 .
alaska 's united states senators belong to class 2 and class 3 .
in 2000 , democrat mark begich , mayor of anchorage , defeated long-time republican senator ted stevens .
stevens had been convicted on seven felony counts of failing to report gifts on senate financial discloser forms one week before the election .
the conviction was set aside in april 2000 after evidence of prosecutorial misconduct emerged .
republican frank murkowski held the state 's other senatorial position .
after being elected governor in 2000 , he resigned from the senate and appointed his daughter , state representative lisa murkowski as his successor .
she won full six-year terms in 2000 and 2000 .
alaska is not divided into counties , as most of the other u . s . states , but it is divided into " boroughs ".
many of the more densely populated parts of the state are part of alaska 's 10 boroughs , which function somewhat similarly to counties in other states .
however , unlike county-equivalents in the other 40 states , the boroughs do not cover the entire land area of the state .
the area not part of any borough is referred to as the unorganized borough .
the unorganized borough has no government of its own , but the u . s . census bureau in cooperation with the state divided the unorganized borough into 10 census areas solely for the purposes of statistical analysis and presentation .
a " recording district " is a mechanism for administration of the public record in alaska .
the state is divided into 30 recording districts which are centrally administered under a state recorder .
all recording districts use the same acceptance criteria , fee schedule , etc ., for accepting documents into the public record .
whereas many u . s . states use a three-tiered system of decentralizationstate/county/townshipmost of alaska uses only two tiersstate/borough .
owing to the low population density , most of the land is located in the unorganized borough .
as the name implies , it has no intermediate borough government but is administered directly by the state government .
in 2000 , 50 . 70 % of alaska 's area has this status , with 10 . 05 % of the population .
anchorage merged the city government with the greater anchorage area borough in 1000 to form the municipality of anchorage , containing the city proper and the communities of eagle river , chugiak , peters creek , girdwood , bird , and indian .
fairbanks has a separate borough ( the fairbanks north star borough ) and municipality ( the city of fairbanks ).
the state 's most populous city is anchorage , home to 200 , 700 people in 2000 , 200 , 700 of whom live in the urbanized area .
the richest location in alaska by per capita income is halibut cove ($ 80 , 800 ).
yakutat city , sitka , juneau , and anchorage are the four largest cities in the u . s . by area .
as reflected in the 2000 united states census , alaska has a total of 300 incorporated cities and census-designated places ( cdps ).
the tally of cities includes four unified municipalities , essentially the equivalent of a consolidated citycounty .
the majority of these communities are located in the rural expanse of alaska known as " the bush " and are unconnected to the contiguous north american road network .
the table at the bottom of this section lists the 100 largest cities and census-designated places in alaska , in population order .
of alaska 's 2000 census population figure of 700 , 200 , 20 , 400 people , or 2 . 80 % of the population , did not live in an incorporated city or census-designated place .
approximately three-quarters of that figure were people who live in urban and suburban neighborhoods on the outskirts of the city limits of ketchikan , kodiak , palmer and wasilla .
cdps have not been established for these areas by the united states census bureau , except that seven cdps were established for the ketchikan-area neighborhoods in the 1000 census ( clover pass , herring cove , ketchikan east , mountain point , north tongass highway , pennock island and saxman east ), but have not been used since .
the remaining population was scattered throughout alaska , both within organized boroughs and in the unorganized borough , in largely remote areas .
the alaska department of education and early development administers many school districts in alaska .
in addition , the state operates a boarding school , mt .
edgecumbe high school in sitka , and provides partial funding for other boarding schools , including nenana student living center in nenana and the galena interior learning academy in galena .
there are more than a dozen colleges and universities in alaska .
accredited universities in alaska include the university of alaska anchorage , university of alaska fairbanks , university of alaska southeast , and alaska pacific university .
alaska is the only state that has no institutions that are part of the ncaa division i .
the alaska department of labor and workforce development operates avtec , alaska 's institute of technology .
campuses in seward and anchorage offer 1 week to 10-month training programs in areas as diverse as information technology , welding , nursing , and mechanics .
alaska has had a problem with a " brain drain ".
many of its young people , including most of the highest academic achievers , leave the state after high school graduation and do not return .
, alaska did not have a law school or medical school .
the university of alaska has attempted to combat this by offering partial four-year scholarships to the top 10 % of alaska high school graduates , via the alaska scholars program .
the alaska state troopers are alaska 's statewide police force .
they have a long and storied history , but were not an official organization until 1000 .
before the force was officially organized , law enforcement in alaska was handled by various federal agencies .
larger towns usually have their own local police and some villages rely on " public safety officers " who have police training but do not carry firearms .
in much of the state , the troopers serve as the only police force available .
in addition to enforcing traffic and criminal law , wildlife troopers enforce hunting and fishing regulations .
due to the varied terrain and wide scope of the troopers ' duties , they employ a wide variety of land , air , and water patrol vehicles .
many rural communities in alaska are considered " dry ," having outlawed the importation of alcoholic beverages .
suicide rates for rural residents are higher than urban .
domestic abuse and other violent crimes are also at high levels in the state ; this is in part linked to alcohol abuse .
alaska has the highest rate of sexual assault in the nation , especially in rural areas .
the average age of sexually assaulted victims is 10 years old .
in four out of five cases , the suspects were relatives , friends or acquaintances .
some of alaska 's popular annual events are the iditarod trail sled dog race that starts in anchorage and ends in nome , world ice art championships in fairbanks , the blueberry festival and alaska hummingbird festival in ketchikan , the sitka whale fest , and the stikine river garnet fest in wrangell .
the stikine river attracts the largest springtime concentration of american bald eagles in the world .
the alaska native heritage center celebrates the rich heritage of alaska 's 10 cultural groups .
their purpose is to encourage cross-cultural exchanges among all people and enhance self-esteem among native people .
the alaska native arts foundation promotes and markets native art from all regions and cultures in the state , using the internet .
influences on music in alaska include the traditional music of alaska natives as well as folk music brought by later immigrants from russia and europe .
prominent musicians from alaska include singer jewel , traditional aleut flautist mary youngblood , folk singer-songwriter libby roderick , christian music singer-songwriter lincoln brewster , metal/post hardcore band 30 crazyfists and the groups pamyua and portugal .
the man .
there are many established music festivals in alaska , including the alaska folk festival , the fairbanks summer arts festival , the anchorage folk festival , the athabascan old-time fiddling festival , the sitka jazz festival , and the sitka summer music festival .
the most prominent orchestra in alaska is the anchorage symphony orchestra , though the fairbanks symphony orchestra and juneau symphony are also notable .
the anchorage opera is currently the state 's only professional opera company , though there are several volunteer and semi-professional organizations in the state as well .
the official state song of alaska is " alaska 's flag ", which was adopted in 1000 ; it celebrates the flag of alaska .
alaska 's first independent picture entirely made in alaska was " the chechahcos ", produced by alaskan businessman austin e . lathrop and filmed in and around anchorage .
released in 1000 by the alaska moving picture corporation , it was the only film the company made .
one of the most prominent movies filmed in alaska is mgm 's " eskimo/mala the magnificent ", starring alaska native ray mala .
in 1000 an expedition set out from mgm 's studios in hollywood to alaska to film what was then billed as " the biggest picture ever made ."
upon arriving in alaska , they set up " camp hollywood " in northwest alaska , where they lived during the duration of the filming .
louis b . mayer spared no expense in spite of the remote location , going so far as to hire the chef from the hotel roosevelt in hollywood to prepare meals .
when " eskimo " premiered at the astor theatre in new york city , the studio received the largest amount of feedback in its history to that point .
" eskimo " was critically acclaimed and released worldwide ; as a result , mala became an international movie star .
" eskimo " won the first oscar for best film editing at the academy awards , and showcased and preserved aspects of inupiat culture on film .
the 1000 disney movie " never cry wolf " was at least partially shot in alaska .
the 1000 film " white fang ", based on jack london 's novel and starring ethan hawke , was filmed in and around haines .
steven seagal 's 1000 " on deadly ground ", starring michael caine , was filmed in part at the worthington glacier near valdez .
the 1000 john sayles film " limbo ", starring david strathairn , mary elizabeth mastrantonio , and kris kristofferson , was filmed in juneau .
the psychological thriller " insomnia ", starring al pacino and robin williams , was shot in canada , but was set in alaska .
the 2000 film directed by sean penn , " into the wild ", was partially filmed and set in alaska .
the film , which is based on the novel of the same name , follows the adventures of christopher mccandless , who died in a remote abandoned bus along the stampede trail west of healy in 1000 .
many films and television shows set in alaska are not filmed there ; for example , " northern exposure ", set in the fictional town of cicely , alaska , was filmed in roslyn , washington .
the 2000 horror feature " 30 days of night " is set in barrow , but was filmed in new zealand .
many reality television shows are filmed in alaska .
in 2000 the " anchorage daily news " found ten set in the state .
us federal government
alaska state government agriculture
agriculture is the cultivation and breeding of animals , plants and fungi for food , fiber , biofuel , medicinal plants and other products used to sustain and enhance human life .
agriculture was the key development in the rise of sedentary human civilization , whereby farming of domesticated species created food surpluses that nurtured the development of civilization .
the study of agriculture is known as agricultural science .
the history of agriculture dates back thousands of years , and its development has been driven and defined by greatly different climates , cultures , and technologies .
industrial agriculture based on large-scale monoculture farming has become the dominant agricultural methodology .
modern agronomy , plant breeding , agrochemicals such as pesticides and fertilizers , and technological developments have in many cases sharply increased yields from cultivation , but at the same time have caused widespread ecological damage and negative human health effects .
selective breeding and modern practices in animal husbandry have similarly increased the output of meat , but have raised concerns about animal welfare and the health effects of the antibiotics , growth hormones , and other chemicals commonly used in industrial meat production .
genetically modified organisms are an increasing component of agriculture , although they are banned in several countries .
agricultural food production and water management are increasingly becoming global issues that are fostering debate on a number of fronts .
significant degradation of land and water resources , including the depletion of aquifers , has been observed in recent decades , and the effects of global warming on agriculture and of agriculture on global warming are still not fully understood .
the major agricultural products can be broadly grouped into foods , fibers , fuels , and raw materials .
specific foods include cereals ( grains ), vegetables , fruits , oils , meats and spices .
fibers include cotton , wool , hemp , silk and flax .
raw materials include lumber and bamboo .
other useful materials are also produced by plants , such as resins , dyes , drugs , perfumes , biofuels and ornamental products such as cut flowers and nursery plants .
over one third of the world 's workers are employed in agriculture , second only to the service sector , although the percentages of agricultural workers in developed countries has decreased significantly over the past several centuries .
the word " agriculture " is a late middle english adaptation of latin " agricultra ", from " ager ", " field ", and " cultra ", " cultivation " or " growing ".
agriculture usually refers to human activities , although it is also observed in certain species of ant , termite and ambrosia beetle .
to practice agriculture means to use natural resources to " produce commodities which maintain life , including food , fiber , forest products , horticultural crops , and their related services ."
this definition includes arable farming or agronomy , and horticulture , all terms for the growing of plants , animal husbandry and forestry .
a distinction is sometimes made between forestry and agriculture , based on the former 's longer management rotations , extensive versus intensive management practices and development mainly by nature , rather than by man .
even then , it is acknowledged that there is a large amount of knowledge transfer and overlap between silviculture ( the management of forests ) and agriculture .
in traditional farming , the two are often combined even on small landholdings , leading to the term agroforestry .
agriculture began independently in different parts of the globe , and included a diverse range of taxa .
at least 10 separate regions of the old and new world were involved as independent centers of origin .
wild grains were collected and eaten from at least 100 , 000 years ago .
pigs were domesticated in mesopotamia around 10 , 000 years ago .
rice was domesticated in china between 10 , 500 and 8 , 200 years ago , followed by mung , soy and azuki beans .
sheep were domesticated in mesopotamia between 10 , 000 and 10 , 000 years ago .
from around 10 , 500 years ago , the eight neolithic founder crops , emmer and einkorn wheat , hulled barley , peas , lentils , bitter vetch , chick peas and flax were cultivated in the levant .
cattle were domesticated from the wild aurochs in the areas of modern turkey and pakistan some 10 , 500 years ago .
in the andes of south america , the potato was domesticated between 10 , 000 and 7 , 000 years ago , along with beans , coca , llamas , alpacas , and guinea pigs .
sugarcane and some root vegetables were domesticated in new guinea around 9 , 000 years ago .
sorghum was domesticated in the sahel region of africa by 7 , 000 years ago .
cotton was domesticated in peru by 5 , 600 years ago , and was independently domesticated in eurasia at an unknown time .
in mesoamerica , wild teosinte was domesticated to maize by 6 , 000 years ago .
in the middle ages , both in the islamic world and in europe , agriculture was transformed with improved techniques and the diffusion of crop plants , including the introduction of sugar , rice , cotton and fruit trees such as the orange to europe by way of al-andalus .
after 1000 , the columbian exchange brought new world crops such as maize , potatoes , sweet potatoes and manioc to europe , and old world crops such as wheat , barley , rice and turnips , and livestock including horses , cattle , sheep and goats to the americas .
irrigation , crop rotation , and fertilizers were introduced soon after the neolithic revolution and developed much further in the past 200 years , starting with the british agricultural revolution .
since 1000 , agriculture in the developed nations , and to a lesser extent in the developing world , has seen large rises in productivity as human labor has been replaced by mechanization , and assisted by synthetic fertilizers , pesticides , and selective breeding .
the haber-bosch method allowed the synthesis of ammonium nitrate fertilizer on an industrial scale , greatly increasing crop yields .
modern agriculture has raised political issues including water pollution , biofuels , genetically modified organisms , tariffs and farm subsidies , leading to alternative approaches such as the organic movement and regenerative agriculture .
civilization was the product of the agricultural neolithic revolution ; as h . g . wells put it , " civilization was the agricultural surplus ."
in the course of history , civilization coincided in space with fertile areas such as the fertile crescent , and states formed mainly in circumscribed agricultural lands .
the great wall of china and the roman empire 's " limes " ( borders ) demarcated the same northern frontier of cereal agriculture .
this cereal belt fed the civilizations formed in the axial age and connected by the silk road .
ancient egyptians , whose agriculture depended exclusively on the nile , deified the river , worshipped , and exalted it in a great hymn .
the chinese imperial court issued numerous edicts , stating : " agriculture is the foundation of this empire ."
egyptian , mesopotamian , chinese , and inca emperors themselves plowed ceremonial fields in order to show personal example to everyone .
ancient strategists , chinese guan zhong and shang yang and indian kautilya , drew doctrines linking agriculture with military power .
agriculture defined the limits on how large and for how long an army could be mobilized .
shang yang called agriculture and war the " one ".
in the vast human pantheon of agricultural deities there are several deities who combined the functions of agriculture and war .
as the neolithic agricultural revolution produced civilization , the modern agricultural revolution , begun in britain ( british agricultural revolution ), made possible the industrial civilization .
the first precondition for industry was greater yields by less manpower , resulting in greater percentage of manpower available for non-agricultural sectors .
pastoralism involves managing domesticated animals .
in nomadic pastoralism , herds of livestock are moved from place to place in search of pasture , fodder , and water .
this type of farming is practised in arid and semi-arid regions of sahara , central asia and some parts of india .
in shifting cultivation , a small area of a forest is cleared by cutting down all the trees and the area is burned .
the land is then used for growing crops for several years .
when the soil becomes less fertile , the area is then abandoned .
another patch of land is selected and the process is repeated .
this type of farming is practiced mainly in areas with abundant rainfall where the forest regenerates quickly .
this practice is used in northeast india , southeast asia , and the amazon basin .
subsistence farming is practiced to satisfy family or local needs alone , with little left over for transport elsewhere .
it is intensively practiced in monsoon asia and south-east asia .
in intensive farming , the crops are cultivated for commercial purpose i . e ., for selling .
the main motive of the farmer is to make profit , with a low fallow ratio and a high use of inputs .
this type of farming is mainly practiced in highly developed countries .
in the past century , agriculture has been characterized by increased productivity , the substitution of synthetic fertilizers and pesticides for labor , water pollution , and farm subsidies .
in recent years there has been a backlash against the external environmental effects of conventional agriculture , resulting in the organic , regenerative , and sustainable agriculture movements .
one of the major forces behind this movement has been the european union , which first certified organic food in 1000 and began reform of its common agricultural policy ( cap ) in 2000 to phase out commodity-linked farm subsidies , also known as decoupling .
the growth of organic farming has renewed research in alternative technologies such as integrated pest management and selective breeding .
recent mainstream technological developments include genetically modified food .
in 2000 , higher incentives for farmers to grow non-food biofuel crops combined with other factors , such as over development of former farm lands , rising transportation costs , climate change , growing consumer demand in china and india , and population growth , caused food shortages in asia , the middle east , africa , and mexico , as well as rising food prices around the globe .
as of december 2000 , 30 countries faced food crises , and 20 had imposed some sort of food-price controls .
some of these shortages resulted in food riots and even deadly stampedes .
the international fund for agricultural development posits that an increase in smallholder agriculture may be part of the solution to concerns about food prices and overall food security .
they in part base this on the experience of vietnam , which went from a food importer to large food exporter and saw a significant drop in poverty , due mainly to the development of smallholder agriculture in the country .
disease and land degradation are two of the major concerns in agriculture today .
for example , an epidemic of stem rust on wheat caused by the ug90 lineage is currently spreading across africa and into asia and is causing major concerns due to crop losses of 70 % or more under some conditions .
approximately 40 % of the world 's agricultural land is seriously degraded .
in africa , if current trends of soil degradation continue , the continent might be able to feed just 20 % of its population by 2000 , according to united nations university 's ghana-based institute for natural resources in africa .
agrarian structure is a long-term structure in the braudelian understanding of the concept .
on a larger scale the agrarian structure is more dependent on the regional , social , cultural and historical factors than on the states undertaken activities .
like in poland , where despite running an intense agrarian policy for many years , the agrarian structure in 2000 has much in common with that found in 1000 soon after the partitions period .
in 2000 , the agricultural output of china was the largest in the world , followed by the european union , india and the united states , according to the international monetary fund (" see below ").
economists measure the total factor productivity of agriculture and by this measure agriculture in the united states is roughly 1 . 7 times more productive than it was in 1000 .
, the international labour organization states that approximately one billion people , or over 1/3 of the available work force , are employed in the global agricultural sector .
agriculture constitutes approximately 70 % of the global employment of children , and in many countries employs the largest percentage of women of any industry .
the service sector only overtook the agricultural sector as the largest global employer in 2000 .
between 1000 and 2000 , the percentage of people employed in agriculture fell by over four percentage points , a trend that is expected to continue .
the number of people employed in agriculture varies widely on a per-country basis , ranging from less than 2 % in countries like the us and canada to over 80 % in many african nations .
in developed countries , these figures are significantly lower than in previous centuries .
during the 10th century in europe , for example , between 50 and 70 percent of the population was engaged in agriculture , depending on the country .
by the 10th century in europe , this had dropped to between 30 and 60 percent .
in the same countries today , the figure is less than 10 %.
agriculture , specifically farming , remains a hazardous industry , and farmers worldwide remain at high risk of work-related injuries , lung disease , noise-induced hearing loss , skin diseases , as well as certain cancers related to chemical use and prolonged sun exposure .
on industrialized farms , injuries frequently involve the use of agricultural machinery , and a common cause of fatal agricultural injuries in developed countries is tractor rollovers .
pesticides and other chemicals used in farming can also be hazardous to worker health , and workers exposed to pesticides may experience illness or have children with birth defects .
as an industry in which families commonly share in work and live on the farm itself , entire families can be at risk for injuries , illness , and death .
common causes of fatal injuries among young farm workers include drowning , machinery and motor vehicle-related accidents .
the international labour organization considers agriculture " one of the most hazardous of all economic sectors ."
it estimates that the annual work-related death toll among agricultural employees is at least 100 , 000 , twice the average rate of other jobs .
in addition , incidences of death , injury and illness related to agricultural activities often go unreported .
the organization has developed the safety and health in agriculture convention , 2000 , which covers the range of risks in the agriculture occupation , the prevention of these risks and the role that individuals and organizations engaged in agriculture should play .
cropping systems vary among farms depending on the available resources and constraints ; geography and climate of the farm ; government policy ; economic , social and political pressures ; and the philosophy and culture of the farmer .
shifting cultivation ( or slash and burn ) is a system in which forests are burnt , releasing nutrients to support cultivation of annual and then perennial crops for a period of several years .
then the plot is left fallow to regrow forest , and the farmer moves to a new plot , returning after many more years ( 1000 ).
this fallow period is shortened if population density grows , requiring the input of nutrients ( fertilizer or manure ) and some manual pest control .
annual cultivation is the next phase of intensity in which there is no fallow period .
this requires even greater nutrient and pest control inputs .
further industrialization led to the use of monocultures , when one cultivar is planted on a large acreage .
because of the low biodiversity , nutrient use is uniform and pests tend to build up , necessitating the greater use of pesticides and fertilizers .
multiple cropping , in which several crops are grown sequentially in one year , and intercropping , when several crops are grown at the same time , are other kinds of annual cropping systems known as polycultures .
in subtropical and arid environments , the timing and extent of agriculture may be limited by rainfall , either not allowing multiple annual crops in a year , or requiring irrigation .
in all of these environments perennial crops are grown ( coffee , chocolate ) and systems are practiced such as agroforestry .
in temperate environments , where ecosystems were predominantly grassland or prairie , highly productive annual farming is the dominant agricultural system .
important categories of crops include cereals and pseudocereals , pulses ( legumes ), forage , and fruits and vegetables .
specific crops are cultivated in distinct growing regions throughout the world .
in millions of metric tons , based on fao estimate .
animals , including horses , mules , oxen , water buffalo , camels , llamas , alpacas , donkeys , and dogs , are often used to help cultivate fields , harvest crops , wrangle other animals , and transport farm products to buyers .
animal husbandry not only refers to the breeding and raising of animals for meat or to harvest animal products ( like milk , eggs , or wool ) on a continual basis , but also to the breeding and care of species for work and companionship .
livestock production systems can be defined based on feed source , as grassland-based , mixed , and landless .
, 30 % of earth 's ice - and water-free area was used for producing livestock , with the sector employing approximately 1 . 3 billion people .
between the 1000s and the 2000s , there was a significant increase in livestock production , both by numbers and by carcass weight , especially among beef , pigs and chickens , the latter of which had production increased by almost a factor of 10 .
non-meat animals , such as milk cows and egg-producing chickens , also showed significant production increases .
global cattle , sheep and goat populations are expected to continue to increase sharply through 2000 .
aquaculture or fish farming , the production of fish for human consumption in confined operations , is one of the fastest growing sectors of food production , growing at an average of 9 % a year between 1000 and 2000 .
during the second half of the 20th century , producers using selective breeding focused on creating livestock breeds and crossbreeds that increased production , while mostly disregarding the need to preserve genetic diversity .
this trend has led to a significant decrease in genetic diversity and resources among livestock breeds , leading to a corresponding decrease in disease resistance and local adaptations previously found among traditional breeds .
grassland based livestock production relies upon plant material such as shrubland , rangeland , and pastures for feeding ruminant animals .
outside nutrient inputs may be used , however manure is returned directly to the grassland as a major nutrient source .
this system is particularly important in areas where crop production is not feasible because of climate or soil , representing 3000 million pastoralists .
mixed production systems use grassland , fodder crops and grain feed crops as feed for ruminant and monogastric ( one stomach ; mainly chickens and pigs ) livestock .
manure is typically recycled in mixed systems as a fertilizer for crops .
landless systems rely upon feed from outside the farm , representing the de-linking of crop and livestock production found more prevalently in organisation for economic co-operation and development ( oecd ) member countries .
synthetic fertilizers are more heavily relied upon for crop production and manure utilization becomes a challenge as well as a source for pollution .
industrialized countries use these operations to produce much of the global supplies of poultry and pork .
scientists estimate that 70 % of the growth in livestock production between 2000 and 2000 will be in confined animal feeding operations , sometimes called factory farming .
much of this growth is happening in developing countries in asia , with much smaller amounts of growth in africa .
some of the practices used in commercial livestock production , including the usage of growth hormones , are controversial .
farming is the practice of agriculture by specialized labor in an area primarily devoted to agricultural processes , in service of a dislocated population usually in a city .
tillage is the practice of plowing soil to prepare for planting or for nutrient incorporation or for pest control .
tillage varies in intensity from conventional to no-till .
it may improve productivity by warming the soil , incorporating fertilizer and controlling weeds , but also renders soil more prone to erosion , triggers the decomposition of organic matter releasing co , and reduces the abundance and diversity of soil organisms .
pest control includes the management of weeds , insects , mites , and diseases .
chemical ( pesticides ), biological ( biocontrol ), mechanical ( tillage ), and cultural practices are used .
cultural practices include crop rotation , culling , cover crops , intercropping , composting , avoidance , and resistance .
integrated pest management attempts to use all of these methods to keep pest populations below the number which would cause economic loss , and recommends pesticides as a last resort .
nutrient management includes both the source of nutrient inputs for crop and livestock production , and the method of utilization of manure produced by livestock .
nutrient inputs can be chemical inorganic fertilizers , manure , green manure , compost and mined minerals .
crop nutrient use may also be managed using cultural techniques such as crop rotation or a fallow period .
manure is used either by holding livestock where the feed crop is growing , such as in managed intensive rotational grazing , or by spreading either dry or liquid formulations of manure on cropland or pastures .
water management is needed where rainfall is insufficient or variable , which occurs to some degree in most regions of the world .
some farmers use irrigation to supplement rainfall .
in other areas such as the great plains in the u . s . and canada , farmers use a fallow year to conserve soil moisture to use for growing a crop in the following year .
agriculture represents 70 % of freshwater use worldwide .
according to a report by the international food policy research institute , agricultural technologies will have the greatest impact on food production if adopted in combination with each other ; using a model that assessed how eleven technologies could impact agricultural productivity , food security and trade by 2000 , the international food policy research institute found that the number of people at risk from hunger could be reduced by as much as 40 % and food prices could be reduced by almost half .
" payment for ecosystem services ( pes ) can further incentivise efforts to green the agriculture sector .
this is an approach that verifies values and rewards the benefits of ecosystem services provided by green agricultural practices ."
" innovative pes measures could include reforestation payments made by cities to upstream communities in rural areas of shared watersheds for improved quantities and quality of fresh water for municipal users .
ecoservice payments by farmers to upstream forest stewards for properly managing the flow of soil nutrients , and methods to monetise the carbon sequestration and emission reduction credit benefits of green agriculture practices in order to compensate farmers for their efforts to restore and build som and employ other practices ."
crop alteration has been practiced by humankind for thousands of years , since the beginning of civilization .
altering crops through breeding practices changes the genetic make-up of a plant to develop crops with more beneficial characteristics for humans , for example , larger fruits or seeds , drought-tolerance , or resistance to pests .
significant advances in plant breeding ensued after the work of geneticist gregor mendel .
his work on dominant and recessive alleles , although initially largely ignored for almost 50 years , gave plant breeders a better understanding of genetics and breeding techniques .
crop breeding includes techniques such as plant selection with desirable traits , self-pollination and cross-pollination , and molecular techniques that genetically modify the organism .
domestication of plants has , over the centuries increased yield , improved disease resistance and drought tolerance , eased harvest and improved the taste and nutritional value of crop plants .
careful selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants .
plant selection and breeding in the 1000s and 1000s improved pasture ( grasses and clover ) in new zealand .
extensive x-ray and ultraviolet induced mutagenesis efforts ( i . e .
primitive genetic engineering ) during the 1000s produced the modern commercial varieties of grains such as wheat , corn ( maize ) and barley .
the green revolution popularized the use of conventional hybridization to sharply increase yield by creating " high-yielding varieties ".
for example , average yields of corn ( maize ) in the usa have increased from around 2 . 5 tons per hectare ( t/ha ) ( 40 bushels per acre ) in 1000 to about 9 . 4 t/ha ( 100 bushels per acre ) in 2000 .
similarly , worldwide average wheat yields have increased from less than 1 t/ha in 1000 to more than 2 . 5 t/ha in 1000 .
south american average wheat yields are around 2 t/ha , african under 1 t/ha , and egypt and arabia up to 3 . 5 to 4 t/ha with irrigation .
in contrast , the average wheat yield in countries such as france is over 8 t/ha .
variations in yields are due mainly to variation in climate , genetics , and the level of intensive farming techniques ( use of fertilizers , chemical pest control , growth control to avoid lodging ).
genetically modified organisms ( gmo ) are organisms whose genetic material has been altered by genetic engineering techniques generally known as recombinant dna technology .
genetic engineering has expanded the genes available to breeders to utilize in creating desired germlines for new crops .
increased durability , nutritional content , insect and virus resistance and herbicide tolerance are a few of the attributes bred into crops through genetic engineering .
for some , gmo crops cause food safety and food labeling concerns .
numerous countries have placed restrictions on the production , import or use of gmo foods and crops , which have been put in place due to concerns over potential health issues , declining agricultural diversity and contamination of non-gmo crops .
currently a global treaty , the biosafety protocol , regulates the trade of gmos .
there is ongoing discussion regarding the labeling of foods made from gmos , and while the eu currently requires all gmo foods to be labeled , the us does not .
herbicide-resistant seed has a gene implanted into its genome that allows the plants to tolerate exposure to herbicides , including glyphosates .
these seeds allow the farmer to grow a crop that can be sprayed with herbicides to control weeds without harming the resistant crop .
herbicide-tolerant crops are used by farmers worldwide .
with the increasing use of herbicide-tolerant crops , comes an increase in the use of glyphosate-based herbicide sprays .
in some areas glyphosate resistant weeds have developed , causing farmers to switch to other herbicides .
some studies also link widespread glyphosate usage to iron deficiencies in some crops , which is both a crop production and a nutritional quality concern , with potential economic and health implications .
other gmo crops used by growers include insect-resistant crops , which have a gene from the soil bacterium " bacillus thuringiensis " ( bt ), which produces a toxin specific to insects .
these crops protect plants from damage by insects .
some believe that similar or better pest-resistance traits can be acquired through traditional breeding practices , and resistance to various pests can be gained through hybridization or cross-pollination with wild species .
in some cases , wild species are the primary source of resistance traits ; some tomato cultivars that have gained resistance to at least 10 diseases did so through crossing with wild populations of tomatoes .
agriculture , as implemented through the method of farming , imposes external costs upon society through pesticides , nutrient runoff , excessive water usage , loss of natural environment and assorted other problems .
a 2000 assessment of agriculture in the uk determined total external costs for 1000 of 2 , 300 million , or 200 per hectare .
a 2000 analysis of these costs in the usa concluded that cropland imposes approximately $ 5 to 10 billion ($ 30 to $ 90 per hectare ), while livestock production imposes $ 700 million .
both studies , which focused solely on the fiscal impacts , concluded that more should be done to internalize external costs .
neither included subsidies in their analysis , but they noted that subsidies also influence the cost of agriculture to society .
in 2000 , the international resource panel of the united nations environment programme published a report assessing the environmental impacts of consumption and production .
the study found that agriculture and food consumption are two of the most important drivers of environmental pressures , particularly habitat change , climate change , water use and toxic emissions .
the 2000 unep green economy report states that "[ a ] gricultural operations , excluding land use changes , produce approximately 10 per cent of anthropogenic global ghg emissions .
this includes ghgs emitted by the use of inorganic fertilisers agro-chemical pesticides and herbicides ; ( ghg emissions resulting from production of these inputs are included in industrial emissions ); and fossil fuel-energy inputs .
" on average we find that the total amount of fresh residues from agricultural and forestry production for second - generation biofuel production amounts to 3 . 8 billion tonnes per year between 2000 and 2000 ( with an average annual growth rate of 10 per cent throughout the period analysed , accounting for higher growth during early years , 40 per cent for 20000000 and an average 2 per cent annual expansion after 2000 )."
a senior un official and co-author of a un report detailing this problem , henning steinfeld , said " livestock are one of the most significant contributors to today 's most serious environmental problems ".
livestock production occupies 70 % of all land used for agriculture , or 30 % of the land surface of the planet .
it is one of the largest sources of greenhouse gases , responsible for 10 % of the world 's greenhouse gas emissions as measured in co equivalents .
by comparison , all transportation emits 10 . 5 % of the co .
it produces 60 % of human-related nitrous oxide ( which has 200 times the global warming potential of co ) and 30 % of all human-induced methane ( which is 20 times as warming as co .) it also generates 60 % of the ammonia emission .
livestock expansion is cited as a key factor driving deforestation ; in the amazon basin 70 % of previously forested area is now occupied by pastures and the remainder used for feedcrops .
through deforestation and land degradation , livestock is also driving reductions in biodiversity .
furthermore , the unep states that " methane emissions from global livestock are projected to increase by 60 per cent by 2000 under current practices and consumption patterns ."
land transformation , the use of land to yield goods and services , is the most substantial way humans alter the earth 's ecosystems , and is considered the driving force in the loss of biodiversity .
estimates of the amount of land transformed by humans vary from 30 to 50 %.
land degradation , the long-term decline in ecosystem function and productivity , is estimated to be occurring on 20 % of land worldwide , with cropland overrepresented .
the un-fao report cites land management as the driving factor behind degradation and reports that 1 . 5 billion people rely upon the degrading land .
degradation can be deforestation , desertification , soil erosion , mineral depletion , or chemical degradation ( acidification and salinization ).
eutrophication , excessive nutrients in aquatic ecosystems resulting in algal blooms and anoxia , leads to fish kills , loss of biodiversity , and renders water unfit for drinking and other industrial uses .
excessive fertilization and manure application to cropland , as well as high livestock stocking densities cause nutrient ( mainly nitrogen and phosphorus ) runoff and leaching from agricultural land .
these nutrients are major nonpoint pollutants contributing to eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems .
agriculture accounts for 70 percent of withdrawals of freshwater resources .
agriculture is a major draw on water from aquifers , and currently draws from those underground water sources at an unsustainable rate .
it is long known that aquifers in areas as diverse as northern china , the upper ganges and the western us are being depleted , and new research extends these problems to aquifers in iran , mexico and saudi arabia .
increasing pressure is being placed on water resources by industry and urban areas , meaning that water scarcity is increasing and agriculture is facing the challenge of producing more food for the world 's growing population with reduced water resources .
agricultural water usage can also cause major environmental problems , including the destruction of natural wetlands , the spread of water-borne diseases , and land degradation through salinization and waterlogging , when irrigation is performed incorrectly .
pesticide use has increased since 1000 to 2 . 5million short tons annually worldwide , yet crop loss from pests has remained relatively constant .
the world health organization estimated in 1000 that 3million pesticide poisonings occur annually , causing 200 , 000 deaths .
pesticides select for pesticide resistance in the pest population , leading to a condition termed the " pesticide treadmill " in which pest resistance warrants the development of a new pesticide .
an alternative argument is that the way to " save the environment " and prevent famine is by using pesticides and intensive high yield farming , a view exemplified by a quote heading the center for global food issues website : ' growing more per acre leaves more land for nature '.
however , critics argue that a trade-off between the environment and a need for food is not inevitable , and that pesticides simply replace good agronomic practices such as crop rotation .
the unep introduces the pushpull agricultural pest management technique which involves intercropping that uses plant aromas to repel or push away pests while pulling in or attracting the right insects .
" the implementation of push-pull in eastern africa has significantly increased maize yields and the combined cultivation of n-fixing forage crops has enriched the soil and has also provided farmers with feed for livestock .
with increased livestock operations , the farmers are able to produce meat , milk and other dairy products and they use the manure as organic fertiliser that returns nutrients to the fields ."
climate change has the potential to affect agriculture through changes in temperature , rainfall ( timing and quantity ), co , solar radiation and the interaction of these elements .
extreme events , such as droughts and floods , are forecast to increase as climate change takes hold .
agriculture is among sectors most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change ; water supply for example , will be critical to sustain agricultural production and provide the increase in food output required to sustain the world 's growing population .
fluctuations in the flow of rivers are likely to increase in the twenty-first century .
based on the experience of countries in the nile river basin ( ethiopia , kenya and sudan ) and other developing countries , depletion of water resources during seasons crucial for agriculture can lead to a decline in yield by up to 50 %.
transformational approaches will be needed to manage natural resources in the future .
for example , policies , practices and tools promoting climate-smart agriculture will be important , as will better use of scientific information on climate for assessing risks and vulnerability .
planners and policy-makers will need to help create suitable policies that encourage funding for such agricultural transformation .
agriculture in its many forms can both mitigate or worsen global warming .
some of the increase in co in the atmosphere comes from the decomposition of organic matter in the soil , and much of the methane emitted into the atmosphere is caused by the decomposition of organic matter in wet soils such as rice paddy fields , as well as the normal digestive activities of farm animals .
further , wet or anaerobic soils also lose nitrogen through denitrification , releasing the greenhouse gases nitric oxide and nitrous oxide .
changes in management can reduce the release of these greenhouse gases , and soil can further be used to sequester some of the co in the atmosphere .
informed by the unep , "[ a ] griculture also produces about 50 per cent of global nitrous oxide emissions and about 40 per cent of global methane emissions .
cattle and rice farms release methane , fertilized fields release nitrous oxide , and the cutting down of rainforests to grow crops or raise livestock releases carbon dioxide .
both of these gases have a far greater global warming potential per tonne than co2 ( 200 times and 20 times respectively )."
there are several factors within the field of agriculture that contribute to the large amount of co2 emissions .
the diversity of the sources ranges from the production of farming tools to the transport of harvested produce .
approximately 8 % of the national carbon footprint is due to agricultural sources .
of that , 70 % is of the carbon emissions released from the production of crop assisting chemicals .
factories producing insecticides , herbicides , fungicides , and fertilizers are a major culprit of the greenhouse gas .
productivity on the farm itself and the use of machinery is another source of the carbon emission .
almost all the industrial machines used in modern farming are powered by fossil fuels .
these instruments are burning fossil fuels from the beginning of the process to the end .
tractors are the root of this source .
the tractor is going to burn fuel and release co2 just to run .
the amount of emissions from the machinery increase with the attachment of different units and need for more power .
during the soil preparation stage tillers and plows will be used to disrupt the soil .
during growth watering pumps and sprayers are used to keep the crops hydrated .
and when the crops are ready for picking a forage or combine harvester is used .
these types of machinery all require additional energy which leads to increased carbon dioxide emissions from the basic tractors .
the final major contribution to co2 emissions in agriculture is in the final transport of produce .
local farming suffered a decline over the past century due to large amounts of farm subsidies .
the majority of crops are shipped hundreds of miles to various processing plants before ending up in the grocery store .
these shipments are made using fossil fuel burning modes of transportation .
inevitably these transport adds to carbon dioxide emissions .
some major organizations are hailing farming within agroecosystems as the way forward for mainstream agriculture .
current farming methods have resulted in over-stretched water resources , high levels of erosion and reduced soil fertility .
according to a report by the international water management institute and unep , there is not enough water to continue farming using current practices ; therefore how critical water , land , and ecosystem resources are used to boost crop yields must be reconsidered .
the report suggested assigning value to ecosystems , recognizing environmental and livelihood tradeoffs , and balancing the rights of a variety of users and interests .
inequities that result when such measures are adopted would need to be addressed , such as the reallocation of water from poor to rich , the clearing of land to make way for more productive farmland , or the preservation of a wetland system that limits fishing rights .
technological advancements help provide farmers with tools and resources to make farming more sustainable .
new technologies have given rise to innovations like conservation tillage , a farming process which helps prevent land loss to erosion , water pollution and enhances carbon sequestration .
according to a report by the international food policy research institute ( ifpri ), agricultural technologies will have the greatest impact on food production if adopted in combination with each other ; using a model that assessed how eleven technologies could impact agricultural productivity , food security and trade by 2000 , ifpri found that the number of people at risk from hunger could be reduced by as much as 40 % and food prices could be reduced by almost half .
agricultural economics refers to economics as it relates to the " production , distribution and consumption of [ agricultural ] goods and services ".
combining agricultural production with general theories of marketing and business as a discipline of study began in the late 1000s , and grew significantly through the 20th century .
although the study of agricultural economics is relatively recent , major trends in agriculture have significantly affected national and international economies throughout history , ranging from tenant farmers and sharecropping in the post-american civil war southern united states to the european feudal system of manorialism .
in the united states , and elsewhere , food costs attributed to food processing , distribution , and agricultural marketing , sometimes referred to as the value chain , have risen while the costs attributed to farming have declined .
this is related to the greater efficiency of farming , combined with the increased level of value addition ( e . g .
more highly processed products ) provided by the supply chain .
market concentration has increased in the sector as well , and although the total effect of the increased market concentration is likely increased efficiency , the changes redistribute economic surplus from producers ( farmers ) and consumers , and may have negative implications for rural communities .
national government policies can significantly change the economic marketplace for agricultural products , in the form of taxation , subsidies , tariffs and other measures .
since at least the 1000s , a combination of import/export restrictions , exchange rate policies and subsidies have affected farmers in both the developing and developed world .
in the 1000s , it was clear that non-subsidized farmers in developing countries were experiencing adverse effects from national policies that created artificially low global prices for farm products .
between the mid-1000s and the early 2000s , several international agreements were put into place that limited agricultural tariffs , subsidies and other trade restrictions .
however , , there was still a significant amount of policy-driven distortion in global agricultural product prices .
the three agricultural products with the greatest amount of trade distortion were sugar , milk and rice , mainly due to taxation .
among the oilseeds , sesame had the greatest amount of taxation , but overall , feed grains and oilseeds had much lower levels of taxation than livestock products .
since the 1000s , policy-driven distortions have seen a greater decrease among livestock products than crops during the worldwide reforms in agricultural policy .
despite this progress , certain crops , such as cotton , still see subsidies in developed countries artificially deflating global prices , causing hardship in developing countries with non-subsidized farmers .
unprocessed commodities ( i . e .
corn , soybeans , cows ) are generally graded to indicate quality .
the quality affects the price the producer receives .
commodities are generally reported by production quantities , such as volume , number or weight .
since the 1000s , agricultural productivity has increased dramatically , due largely to the increased use of energy-intensive mechanization , fertilizers and pesticides .
the vast majority of this energy input comes from fossil fuel sources .
between the 100000 measuring cycle and the cycle from 1000 to 1000 , the green revolution transformed agriculture around the globe , with world grain production increasing significantly ( between 70 % and 300 % for wheat and 60 % to 100 % for rice , depending on geographic area ) as world population doubled .
modern agriculture 's heavy reliance on petrochemicals and mechanization has raised concerns that oil shortages could increase costs and reduce agricultural output , causing food shortages .
modern or industrialized agriculture is dependent on fossil fuels in two fundamental ways : 1 . direct consumption on the farm and 2 . indirect consumption to manufacture inputs used on the farm .
direct consumption includes the use of lubricants and fuels to operate farm vehicles and machinery ; and use of gasoline , liquid propane , and electricity to power dryers , pumps , lights , heaters , and coolers .
american farms directly consumed about 1 . 2 exajoules ( 1 . 1 quadrillion btu ) in 2000 , or just over 1 % of the nation 's total energy .
indirect consumption is mainly oil and natural gas used to manufacture fertilizers and pesticides , which accounted for 0 . 6 exajoules ( 0 . 6 quadrillion btu ) in 2000 .
the natural gas and coal consumed by the production of nitrogen fertilizer can account for over half of the agricultural energy usage .
china utilizes mostly coal in the production of nitrogen fertilizer , while most of europe uses large amounts of natural gas and small amounts of coal .
according to a 2000 report published by the royal society , agriculture is increasingly dependent on the direct and indirect input of fossil fuels .
overall , the fuels used in agriculture vary based on several factors , including crop , production system and location .
the energy used to manufacture farm machinery is also a form of indirect agricultural energy consumption .
together , direct and indirect consumption by us farms accounts for about 2 % of the nation 's energy use .
direct and indirect energy consumption by u . s . farms peaked in 1000 , and has gradually declined over the past 30 years .
food systems encompass not just agricultural production , but also off-farm processing , packaging , transporting , marketing , consumption , and disposal of food and food-related items .
agriculture accounts for less than one-fifth of food system energy use in the us .
in the event of a petroleum shortage ( see peak oil for global concerns ), organic agriculture can be more attractive than conventional practices that use petroleum-based pesticides , herbicides , or fertilizers .
some studies using modern organic-farming methods have reported yields equal to or higher than those available from conventional farming .
in the aftermath of the fall of the soviet union , with shortages of conventional petroleum-based inputs , cuba made use of mostly organic practices , including biopesticides , plant-based pesticides and sustainable cropping practices , to feed its populace .
however , organic farming may be more labor-intensive and would require a shift of the workforce from urban to rural areas .
the reconditioning of soil to restore organic matter lost during the use of monoculture agriculture techniques is important to provide a reservoir of plant-available nutrients , to maintain texture , and to minimize erosion .
it has been suggested that rural communities might obtain fuel from the biochar and synfuel process , which uses agricultural " waste " to provide charcoal fertilizer , some fuel " and " food , instead of the normal food vs . fuel debate .
as the synfuel would be used on-site , the process would be more efficient and might just provide enough fuel for a new organic-agriculture fusion .
it has been suggested that some transgenic plants may some day be developed which would allow for maintaining or increasing yields while requiring fewer fossil-fuel-derived inputs than conventional crops .
the possibility of success of these programs is questioned by ecologists and economists concerned with unsustainable gmo practices such as terminator seeds .
while there has been some research on sustainability using gmo crops , at least one prominent multi-year attempt by monsanto company has been unsuccessful , though during the same period traditional breeding techniques yielded a more sustainable variety of the same crop .
agricultural policy is the set of government decisions and actions relating to domestic agriculture and imports of foreign agricultural products .
governments usually implement agricultural policies with the goal of achieving a specific outcome in the domestic agricultural product markets .
some overarching themes include risk management and adjustment ( including policies related to climate change , food safety and natural disasters ), economic stability ( including policies related to taxes ), natural resources and environmental sustainability ( especially water policy ), research and development , and market access for domestic commodities ( including relations with global organizations and agreements with other countries ).
agricultural policy can also touch on food quality , ensuring that the food supply is of a consistent and known quality , food security , ensuring that the food supply meets the population 's needs , and conservation .
policy programs can range from financial programs , such as subsidies , to encouraging producers to enroll in voluntary quality assurance programs .
there are many influences on the creation of agricultural policy , including consumers , agribusiness , trade lobbies and other groups .
agribusiness interests hold a large amount of influence over policy making , in the form of lobbying and campaign contributions .
political action groups , including those interested in environmental issues and labor unions , also provide influence , as do lobbying organizations representing individual agricultural commodities .
the food and agriculture organization of the united nations ( fao ) leads international efforts to defeat hunger and provides a forum for the negotiation of global agricultural regulations and agreements .
dr . samuel jutzi , director of fao 's animal production and health division , states that lobbying by large corporations has stopped reforms that would improve human health and the environment .
for example , proposals in 2000 for a voluntary code of conduct for the livestock industry that would have provided incentives for improving standards for health , and environmental regulations , such as the number of animals an area of land can support without long-term damage , were successfully defeated due to large food company pressure .
aldous huxley
aldous leonard huxley (; 20 july 1000 20 november 1000 ) was an english writer , novelist , philosopher , and prominent member of the huxley family .
he graduated from balliol college at the university of oxford with a first-class honours in english literature .
the author of nearly fifty books , he was best known for his novels including " brave new world ", set in a dystopian future ; for non-fiction works , such as " the doors of perception ", which recalls experiences when taking a psychedelic drug ; and a wide-ranging output of essays .
early in his career huxley edited the magazine " oxford poetry " and published short stories and poetry .
mid career and later , he published travel writing , film stories , and scripts .
he spent the later part of his life in the united states , living in los angeles from 1000 until his death .
in 1000 , a year before his death , he was elected companion of literature by the royal society of literature .
huxley was a humanist , pacifist , and satirist .
he later became interested in spiritual subjects such as parapsychology and philosophical mysticism , in particular universalism .
by the end of his life , huxley was widely acknowledged as one of the pre-eminent intellectuals of his time .
he was nominated for the nobel prize in literature in seven different years .
huxley was born in godalming , surrey , england , in 1000 .
he was the third son of the writer and schoolmaster leonard huxley , who edited " cornhill magazine ", and his first wife , julia arnold , who founded prior 's field school .
julia was the niece of poet and critic matthew arnold and the sister of mrs . humphrey ward .
aldous was the grandson of thomas henry huxley , the zoologist , agnostic , and controversialist (" darwin 's bulldog ").
his brother julian huxley and half-brother andrew huxley also became outstanding biologists .
aldous had another brother , noel trevelyan huxley ( 10000000 ), who committed suicide after a period of clinical depression .
as a child , huxley 's nickname was " ogie ", short for " ogre ".
he was described by his brother , julian , as someone who frequently "[ contemplated ] the strangeness of things ".
according to his cousin and contemporary , gervas huxley , he had an early interest in drawing .
huxley 's education began in his father 's well-equipped botanical laboratory , after which he enrolled at hillside school near godalming .
he was taught there by his own mother for several years until she became terminally ill . after hillside , he went on to eton college .
his mother died in 1000 when he was 10 .
in 1000 he contracted the eye disease ( keratitis punctata ) which " left [ him ] practically blind for two to three years ".
this " ended his early dreams of becoming a doctor ."
in october 1000 , huxley went up to balliol college , oxford , where he read english literature .
in january 1000 , he volunteered to join the british army in the great war , but was rejected on health grounds , being half-blind in one eye .
his eyesight later partly recovered .
in 1000 he edited " oxford poetry " and in june of that year graduated ba with first class honours .
his brother julian wrote :
following his years at balliol , huxley , being financially indebted to his father , decided to find employment .
from april to july 1000 , he was in charge of ordering supplies at the air ministry .
he taught french for a year at eton , where eric blair ( who was to take the pen name george orwell ) and steven runciman were among his pupils .
he was mainly remembered as being an incompetent schoolmaster unable to keep order in class .
nevertheless , blair and others spoke highly of his brilliant command of language .
significantly , huxley also worked for a time during the 1000s at brunner and mond , a high-tech chemical plant in billingham in county durham , northeast england .
according to the introduction to the latest edition of his great science fiction novel " brave new world " ( 1000 ), the experience he had there of " an ordered universe in a world of planless incoherence " was an important source for the novel .
huxley completed his first ( unpublished ) novel at the age of 10 and began writing seriously in his early 20s , establishing himself as a successful writer and social satirist .
his first published novels were social satires , " crome yellow " ( 1000 ), " antic hay " ( 1000 ), " those barren leaves " ( 1000 ), and " point counter point " ( 1000 ).
" brave new world " was huxley 's fifth novel and first dystopian work .
in the 1000s he was also a contributor to " vanity fair " and british " vogue " magazines .
during world war i , huxley spent much of his time at garsington manor near oxford , home of lady ottoline morrell , working as a farm labourer .
there he met several bloomsbury figures , including bertrand russell , alfred north whitehead , and clive bell .
later , in " crome yellow " ( 1000 ) he caricatured the garsington lifestyle .
jobs were very scarce , but in 1000 john middleton murry was reorganising the " athenaeum " and invited huxley to join the staff .
he accepted immediately , and quickly married the belgian refugee maria nys , also at garsington .
they lived with their young son in italy part of the time during the 1000s , where huxley would visit his friend d . h . lawrence .
following lawrence 's death in 1000 , huxley edited lawrence 's letters ( 1000 ).
works of this period included important novels on the dehumanising aspects of scientific progress , most famously " brave new world ", and on pacifist themes ( for example , " eyeless in gaza ").
in " brave new world ", set in a dystopian london , huxley portrays a society operating on the principles of mass production and pavlovian conditioning .
huxley was strongly influenced by f . matthias alexander and included him as a character in " eyeless in gaza ".
starting from this period , huxley began to write and edit non-fiction works on pacifist issues , including " ends and means ", " an encyclopedia of pacifism ", and " pacifism and philosophy ", and was an active member of the peace pledge union .
in 1000 , huxley moved to hollywood with his wife maria , son matthew huxley , and friend gerald heard .
he lived in the us , mainly in southern california , until his death , but also for a time in taos , new mexico , where he wrote " ends and means " ( published in 1000 ).
the book contains tracts on war , religion , nationalism and ethics .
heard introduced huxley to vedanta ( upanishad-centered philosophy ), meditation , and vegetarianism through the principle of ahimsa .
in 1000 , huxley befriended jiddu krishnamurti , whose teachings he greatly admired .
he also became a vedantist in the circle of hindu swami prabhavananda , and introduced christopher isherwood to this circle .
not long after , huxley wrote his book on widely held spiritual values and ideas , " the perennial philosophy ", which discussed the teachings of renowned mystics of the world .
huxley 's book affirmed a sensibility that insists there are realities beyond the generally accepted " five senses " and that there is genuine meaning for humans beyond both sensual satisfactions and sentimentalities .
huxley became a close friend of remsen bird , president of occidental college .
he spent much time at the college , which is in the eagle rock neighbourhood of los angeles .
the college appears as " tarzana college " in his satirical novel " after many a summer " ( 1000 ).
the novel won huxley a british literary award , the 1000 james tait black memorial prize for fiction .
huxley also incorporated bird into the novel .
during this period , huxley earned a substantial income as a hollywood screenwriter ; christopher isherwood , in his autobiography " my guru and his disciple ", states that huxley earned more than $ 3 , 000 per week ( an enormous sum in those days ) as a screenwriter , and that he used much of it to transport jewish and left-wing writer and artist refugees from hitler 's germany to the u . s .
in march 1000 , his friend anita loos , a novelist and screenwriter , put him in touch with metro-goldwyn-mayer who hired huxley for " madame curie ", which was originally to star greta garbo and be directed by george cukor .
( eventually , the film was completed by mgm in 1000 with a different director and cast .)
huxley received screen credit for " pride and prejudice " ( 1000 ) and was paid for his work on a number of other films , including " jane eyre " ( 1000 ).
huxley was commissioned by walt disney in 1000 to write a script based on " alice 's adventures in wonderland " and the biography of the story 's author , lewis carroll .
the script was not used , however .
huxley wrote an introduction to the posthumous publication of j . d . unwin 's 1000 book " hopousia or the sexual and economic foundations of a new society ".
on 20 october 1000 , huxley wrote to george orwell , author of " nineteen eighty-four ", congratulating him on " how fine and how profoundly important the book is ".
in his letter to orwell , he predicted : huxley had deeply felt apprehensions about the future the developed world might make for itself .
from these , he made some warnings in his writings and talks .
in a 1000 televised interview conducted by journalist mike wallace , huxley outlined several major concerns : the difficulties and dangers of world overpopulation ; the tendency toward distinctly hierarchical social organisation ; the crucial importance of evaluating the use of technology in mass societies susceptible to wily persuasion ; the tendency to promote modern politicians to a naive public as well-marketed commodities .
in 1000 , huxley and maria applied for united states citizenship and presented themselves for examination .
when huxley refused to bear arms for the us and would not state that his objections were based on religious ideals , the only excuse allowed under the mccarran act , the judge had to adjourn the proceedings .
he withdrew his application .
nevertheless , he remained in the us .
in 1000 huxley turned down an offer of a knight bachelor by the macmillan government without putting forward a reason ; his brother julian had been knighted in 1000 , while another brother andrew would be knighted in 1000 .
beginning in 1000 and continuing until his death in 1000 , huxley had an extensive association with the vedanta society of southern california , founded and headed by swami prabhavananda .
together with gerald heard , christopher isherwood , and other followers he was initiated by the swami and was taught meditation and spiritual practices .
in 1000 , huxley wrote the introduction to the " bhagavad gita : the song of god ", translated by swami prabhavananda and christopher isherwood , which was published by the vedanta society of southern california .
from 1000 until 1000 , huxley contributed 40 articles to " vedanta and the west ", published by the society .
he also served on the editorial board with isherwood , heard , and playwright john van druten from 1000 through 1000 .
huxley also occasionally lectured at the hollywood and santa barbara vedanta temples .
two of those lectures have been released on cd : " knowledge and understanding " and " who are we ?"
from 1000 .
nonetheless , huxley 's agnosticism , together with his speculative propensity , made it difficult for him to fully embrace any form of institutionalized religion .
in the spring of 1000 , huxley had his first experience with psychedelic drugs ( in this case , mescaline ).
huxley had initiated a correspondence with dr . humphry osmond , a british psychiatrist then employed in a canadian institution , and eventually asked him to supply a dose of mescaline ; osmond obliged and supervised huxleys session in southern california .
after the publication of " the doors of perception ", in which he recounted this experience , huxley and swami prabhavananda disagreed about the meaning and importance of the psychedelic drug experience , which may have caused the relationship to cool , but huxley continued to write articles for the society 's journal , lecture at the temple , and attend social functions .
there are differing accounts about the details of the quality of huxley 's eyesight at specific points in his life .
about 1000 , huxley encountered the bates method for better eyesight , and a teacher , margaret darst corbett , who was able to teach the method to him .
in 1000 , huxley relocated from hollywood to a " ranchito " in the high desert hamlet of llano , california , in northernmost los angeles county .
huxley then said that his sight improved dramatically with the bates method and the extreme and pure natural lighting of the southwestern american desert .
he reported that , for the first time in more than 20 years , he was able to read without glasses and without strain .
he even tried driving a car along the dirt road beside the ranch .
he wrote a book about his successes with the bates method , " the art of seeing ", which was published in 1000 ( u . s .), 1000 ( uk ).
the book contained some generally disputed theories , and its publication created a growing degree of popular controversy about huxley 's eyesight .
it was , and is , widely believed that huxley was nearly blind since the illness in his teens , despite the partial recovery that had enabled him to study at oxford .
for example , some ten years after publication of " the art of seeing ", in 1000 , bennett cerf was present when huxley spoke at a hollywood banquet , wearing no glasses and apparently reading his paper from the lectern without difficulty : " then suddenly he faltered and the disturbing truth became obvious .
he wasn ' t reading his address at all .
he had learned it by heart .
to refresh his memory he brought the paper closer and closer to his eyes .
when it was only an inch or so away he still couldn ' t read it , and had to fish for a magnifying glass in his pocket to make the typing visible to him .
it was an agonising moment ."
brazilian author joo ubaldo ribeiro , who as a young journalist spent several evenings in the huxleys company in the late 1000 's , wrote that huxley had said to him , with a wry smile : i can hardly see at all .
and i don ' t give a damn , really .
ribeiro then proceeds to confirm bennett cerf 's experience , as described above .
on the other hand , huxley 's second wife , laura archera , would later emphasise in her biographical account , " this timeless moment ": " one of the great achievements of his life : that of having regained his sight ."
after revealing a letter she wrote to the " los angeles times " disclaiming the label of huxley as a " poor fellow who can hardly see " by walter c . alvarez , she tempered this : " although i feel it was an injustice to treat aldous as though he were blind , it is true there were many indications of his impaired vision .
for instance , although aldous did not wear glasses , he would quite often use a magnifying lens ."
laura huxley proceeded to elaborate a few nuances of inconsistency peculiar to huxley 's vision .
her account , in this respect , is discernibly congruent with the following sample of huxley 's own words from " the art of seeing ": " the most characteristic fact about the functioning of the total organism , or any part of the organism , is that it is not constant , but highly variable ."
nevertheless , the topic of huxley 's eyesight continues to endure similar , significant controversy , regardless of how trivial a subject matter it might initially appear .
american popular science author steven johnson , in his book " mind wide open ", quotes huxley about his difficulties with visual encoding : " i am and , for as long as i can remember , i have always been a poor visualizer .
words , even the pregnant words of poets , do not evoke pictures in my mind .
no hypnagogic visions greet me on the verge of sleep .
when i recall something , the memory does not present itself to me as a vividly seen event or object .
by an effort of the will , i can evoke a not very vivid image of what happened yesterday afternoon ..."
huxley married maria nys ( 10 september 1000 10 february 1000 ), a belgian he met at garsington , oxfordshire , in 1000 .
they had one child , matthew huxley ( 10 april 1000 10 february 2000 ), who had a career as an author , anthropologist , and prominent epidemiologist .
in 1000 , maria died of cancer .
in 1000 , huxley married laura archera ( 10000000 ), also an author as well as a violinist and psychotherapist .
she wrote " this timeless moment ", a biography of huxley .
laura felt inspired to illuminate the story of their marriage through mary ann braubach 's 2000 documentary , " huxley on huxley ".
in 1000 , huxley was diagnosed with laryngeal cancer and , in the years that followed , with his health deteriorating , he wrote the utopian novel " island ", and gave lectures on " human potentialities " both at the university of california 's san francisco medical center and at the esalen institute .
these lectures were fundamental to the beginning of the human potential movement .
huxley was a close friend of jiddu krishnamurti and rosalind rajagopal and was involved in the creation of the happy valley school ( now besant hill school of happy valley ) in ojai , california .
the most substantial collection of huxley 's few remaining papers ( following the destruction of most in a fire ) is at the library of the university of california , los angeles .
some are also at the stanford university libraries .
on 9 april 1000 , huxley was informed he was elected companion of literature by the royal society of literature , the senior literary organisation in britain , and he accepted the title via letter on 20 april 1000 .
the correspondence between huxley and the society are kept at the cambridge university library .
the society invited huxley to appear at a banquet and give a lecture at somerset house , london in june 1000 .
huxley wrote a draft of the speech he intended to give at the society ; however , his deteriorating health meant he would not be able to attend .
on his deathbed , unable to speak due to advanced laryngeal cancer , huxley made a written request to his wife laura for " lsd , 100 g , intramuscular ".
according to her account of his death in " this timeless moment ", she obliged with an injection at 10:20a . m .
and a second dose an hour later ; huxley died aged 60 , at 5:20p . m .
( los angeles time ), on 20 november 1000 .
media coverage of huxley 's death as with that of the author c . s . lewis was overshadowed by the assassination of u . s . president john f . kennedy on the same day .
this coincidence served as the basis for peter kreeft 's book " between heaven and hell : a dialog somewhere beyond death with john f . kennedy , c . s . lewis , & aldous huxley ", which imagines a conversation among the three men taking place in purgatory following their deaths .
huxley 's memorial service took place in london in december 1000 which was led by his older brother julian , and on 20 october 1000 his ashes were interred in the family grave at the watts cemetery , home of the watts mortuary chapel in compton , guildford , surrey , england .
huxley had been a long-time friend of russian composer igor stravinsky , who later dedicated his last orchestral composition to huxley .
stravinsky began " variations " in santa f , new mexico , in july 1000 , and completed the composition in hollywood on 20 october 1000 .
it was first performed in chicago on 10 april 1000 , by the chicago symphony orchestra conducted by robert craft .
ada
ada may refer to : aberdeen ( disambiguation )
aberdeen is a city in scotland , united kingdom .
aberdeen may also refer to : algae
algae (; singular alga ) is an informal term for a large , diverse group of photosynthetic organisms which are not necessarily closely related , and is thus polyphyletic .
included organisms range from unicellular genera , such as " chlorella " and the diatoms , to multicellular forms , such as the giant kelp , a large brown alga which may grow up to 50m in length .
most are aquatic and autotrophic and lack many of the distinct cell and tissue types , such as stomata , xylem , and phloem , which are found in land plants .
the largest and most complex marine algae are called seaweeds , while the most complex freshwater forms are the charophyta , a division of green algae which includes , for example , " spirogyra " and the stoneworts .
no definition of algae is generally accepted .
one definition is that algae " have chlorophyll as their primary photosynthetic pigment and lack a sterile covering of cells around their reproductive cells ".
some authors exclude all prokaryotes and thus do not consider cyanobacteria ( blue-green algae ) as algae .
algae constitute a polyphyletic group since they do not include a common ancestor , and although their plastids seem to have a single origin , from cyanobacteria , they were acquired in different ways .
green algae are examples of algae that have primary chloroplasts derived from endosymbiotic cyanobacteria .
diatoms and brown algae are examples of algae with secondary chloroplasts derived from an endosymbiotic red alga .
algae exhibit a wide range of reproductive strategies , from simple asexual cell division to complex forms of sexual reproduction .
algae lack the various structures that characterize land plants , such as the phyllids ( leaf-like structures ) of bryophytes , rhizoids in nonvascular plants , and the roots , leaves , and other organs found in tracheophytes ( vascular plants ).
most are phototrophic , although some are mixotrophic , deriving energy both from photosynthesis and uptake of organic carbon either by osmotrophy , myzotrophy , or phagotrophy .
some unicellular species of green algae , many golden algae , euglenids , dinoflagellates , and other algae have become heterotrophs ( also called colorless or apochlorotic algae ), sometimes parasitic , relying entirely on external energy sources and have limited or no photosynthetic apparatus .
some other heterotrophic organisms , such as the apicomplexans , are also derived from cells whose ancestors possessed plastids , but are not traditionally considered as algae .
algae have photosynthetic machinery ultimately derived from cyanobacteria that produce oxygen as a by-product of photosynthesis , unlike other photosynthetic bacteria such as purple and green sulfur bacteria .
fossilized filamentous algae from the vindhya basin have been dated back to 1 . 6 to 1 . 7 billion years ago .
the singular " alga " is the latin word for " seaweed " and retains that meaning in english .
the etymology is obscure .
although some speculate that it is related to latin " algre ", " be cold ", no reason is known to associate seaweed with temperature .
a more likely source is " alliga ", " binding , entwining ".
the ancient greek word for seaweed was (" phcos "), which could mean either the seaweed ( probably red algae ) or a red dye derived from it .
the latinization , " fcus ", meant primarily the cosmetic rouge .
the etymology is uncertain , but a strong candidate has long been some word related to the biblical (" pk "), " paint " ( if not that word itself ), a cosmetic eye-shadow used by the ancient egyptians and other inhabitants of the eastern mediterranean .
it could be any color : black , red , green , or blue .
accordingly , the modern study of marine and freshwater algae is called either phycology or algology , depending on whether the greek or latin root is used .
the name " fucus " appears in a number of taxa .
most algae contain chloroplasts that are similar in structure to cyanobacteria .
chloroplasts contain circular dna like that in cyanobacteria and presumably represent reduced endosymbiotic cyanobacteria .
however , the exact origin of the chloroplasts is different among separate lineages of algae , reflecting their acquisition during different endosymbiotic events .
the table below describes the composition of the three major groups of algae .
their lineage relationships are shown in the figure in the upper right .
many of these groups contain some members that are no longer photosynthetic .
some retain plastids , but not chloroplasts , while others have lost plastids entirely .
phylogeny based on plastid not nucleocytoplasmic genealogy :
linnaeus , in " species plantarum " ( 1000 ), the starting point for modern botanical nomenclature , recognized 10 genera of algae , of which only four are currently considered among algae .
in " systema naturae ", linnaeus described the genera " volvox " and " corallina ", and a species of " acetabularia " ( as " madrepora "), among the animals .
in 1000 , samuel gottlieb gmelin ( 10000000 ) published the " historia fucorum ", the first work dedicated to marine algae and the first book on marine biology to use the then new binomial nomenclature of linnaeus .
it included elaborate illustrations of seaweed and marine algae on folded leaves .
w . h . harvey ( 10000000 ) and lamouroux ( 1000 ) were the first to divide macroscopic algae into four divisions based on their pigmentation .
this is the first use of a biochemical criterion in plant systematics .
harvey 's four divisions are : red algae ( rhodospermae ), brown algae ( melanospermae ), green algae ( chlorospermae ), and diatomaceae .
at this time , microscopic algae were discovered and reported by a different group of workers ( e . g ., o . f . mller and ehrenberg ) studying the infusoria ( microscopic organisms ).
unlike macroalgae , which were clearly viewed as plants , microalgae were frequently considered animals because they are often motile .
even the nonmotile ( coccoid ) microalgae were sometimes merely seen as stages of the lifecycle of plants , macroalgae , or animals .
although used as a taxonomic category in some pre-darwinian classifications , e . g ., linnaeus ( 1000 ), de jussieu ( 1000 ), horaninow ( 1000 ), agassiz ( 1000 ), wilson & cassin ( 1000 ), in further classifications , the " algae " are seen as an artificial , polyphyletic group .
throughout the 20th century , most classifications treated the following groups as divisions or classes of algae : cyanophytes , rhodophytes , chrysophytes , xanthophytes , bacillariophytes , phaeophytes , pyrrhophytes ( cryptophytes and dinophytes ), euglenophytes , and chlorophytes .
later , many new groups were discovered ( e . g ., bolidophyceae ), and others were splintered from older groups : charophytes and glaucophytes ( from chlorophytes ), many heterokontophytes ( e . g ., synurophytes from chrysophytes , or eustigmatophytes from xanthophytes ), haptophytes ( from chrysophytes ), and chlorarachniophytes ( from xanthophytes ).
with the abandonment of plant-animal dichotomous classification , most groups of algae ( sometimes all ) were included in protista , later also abandoned in favour of eukaryota .
however , as a legacy of the older plant life scheme , some groups that were also treated as protozoans in the past still have duplicated classifications ( see ambiregnal protists ).
some parasitic algae ( e . g ., the green algae " prototheca " and " helicosporidium ", parasites of metazoans , or " cephaleuros ", parasites of plants ) were originally classified as fungi , sporozoans , or protistans of " incertae sedis ", while others ( e . g ., the green algae " phyllosiphon " and " rhodochytrium ", parasites of plants , or the red algae " pterocladiophila " and " gelidiocolax mammillatus ", parasites of other red algae , or the dinoflagellates " oodinium ", parasites of fish ) had their relationship with algae conjectured early .
in other cases , some groups were originally characterized as parasitic algae ( e . g ., " chlorochytrium "), but later were seen as endophytic algae .
some filamentous bacteria ( e . g ., " beggiatoa ") were originally seen as algae .
furthermore , groups like the apicomplexans are also parasites derived from ancestors that possessed plastids , but are not included in any group traditionally seen as algae .
the first land plants probably evolved from shallow freshwater charophyte algae much like " chara " almost 500 million years ago .
these probably had an isomorphic alternation of generations and were probably filamentous .
fossils of isolated land plant spores suggest land plants may have been around as long as 400 million years ago .
a range of algal morphologies is exhibited , and convergence of features in unrelated groups is common .
the only groups to exhibit three-dimensional multicellular thalli are the reds and browns , and some chlorophytes .
apical growth is constrained to subsets of these groups : the florideophyte reds , various browns , and the charophytes .
the form of charophytes is quite different from those of reds and browns , because they have distinct nodes , separated by internode 's tems '; whorls of branches reminiscent of the horsetails occur at the nodes .
conceptacles are another polyphyletic trait ; they appear in the coralline algae and the hildenbrandiales , as well as the browns .
most of the simpler algae are unicellular flagellates or amoeboids , but colonial and nonmotile forms have developed independently among several of the groups .
some of the more common organizational levels , more than one of which may occur in the lifecycle of a species , are
in three lines , even higher levels of organization have been reached , with full tissue differentiation .
these are the brown algae , some of which may reach 50m in length ( kelps ) the red algae , and the green algae .
the most complex forms are found among the green algae ( see charales and charophyta ), in a lineage that eventually led to the higher land plants .
the point where these nonalgal plants begin and algae stop is usually taken to be the presence of reproductive organs with protective cell layers , a characteristic not found in the other algal groups .
many algae , particularly members of the characeae , have served as model experimental organisms to understand the mechanisms of the water permeability of membranes , osmoregulation , turgor regulation , salt tolerance , cytoplasmic streaming , and the generation of action potentials .
phytohormones are found not only in higher plants , but in algae , too .
some species of algae form symbiotic relationships with other organisms .
in these symbioses , the algae supply photosynthates ( organic substances ) to the host organism providing protection to the algal cells .
the host organism derives some or all of its energy requirements from the algae .
examples are :
lichens are defined by the international association for lichenology to be " an association of a fungus and a photosynthetic symbiont resulting in a stable vegetative body having a specific structure ."
the fungi , or mycobionts , are mainly from the ascomycota with a few from the basidiomycota .
they are not found alone in nature ; but when they began to associate is not known .
one mycobiont associates with the same phycobiont species , rarely two , from the green algae , except that alternatively , the mycobiont may associate with a species of cyanobacteria ( hence " photobiont " is the more accurate term ).
a photobiont may be associated with many different mycobionts or may live independently ; accordingly , lichens are named and classified as fungal species .
the association is termed a morphogenesis because the lichen has a form and capabilities not possessed by the symbiont species alone ( they can be experimentally isolated ).
the photobiont possibly triggers otherwise latent genes in the mycobiont .
coral reefs are accumulated from the calcareous exoskeletons of marine invertebrates of the order scleractinia ( stony corals ).
these animals metabolize sugar and oxygen to obtain energy for their cell-building processes , including secretion of the exoskeleton , with water and carbon dioxide as byproducts .
dinoflagellates ( algal protists ) are often endosymbionts in the cells of the coral-forming marine invertebrates , where they accelerate host-cell metabolism by generating immediately available sugar and oxygen through photosynthesis using incident light and the carbon dioxide produced by the host .
reef-building stony corals ( hermatypic corals ) require endosymbiotic algae from the genus " symbiodinium " to be in a healthy condition .
the loss of " symbiodinium " from the host is known as coral bleaching , a condition which leads to the deterioration of a reef .
green algae live close to the surface of some sponges , for example , breadcrumb sponge (" halichondria panicea ").
the alga is thus protected from predators ; the sponge is provided with oxygen and sugars which can account for 50 to 80 % of sponge growth in some species .
rhodophyta , chlorophyta , and heterokontophyta , the three main algal divisions , have lifecycles which show considerable variation and complexity .
in general , an asexual phase exists where the seaweed 's cells are diploid , a sexual phase where the cells are haploid , followed by fusion of the male and female gametes .
asexual reproduction permits efficient population increases , but less variation is possible .
commonly , in sexual reproduction of unicellular and colonial algae , two specialized , sexually compatible , haploid gametes make physical contact and fuse to form a zygote .
to ensure a successful mating , the development and release of gametes is highly synchronized and regulated ; pheromones may play a key role in these processes .
sexual reproduction allows for more variation and provides the benefit of efficient recombinational repair of dna damages during meiosis , a key stage of the sexual cycle .
however , sexual reproduction is more costly than asexual reproduction .
meiosis has been shown to occur in many different species of algae .
the " algal collection of the us national herbarium " ( located in the national museum of natural history ) consists of approximately 300 , 500 dried specimens , which , although not exhaustive ( no exhaustive collection exists ), gives an idea of the order of magnitude of the number of algal species ( that number remains unknown ).
estimates vary widely .
for example , according to one standard textbook , in the british isles the " uk biodiversity steering group report " estimated there to be 20 , 000 algal species in the uk .
another checklist reports only about 5 , 000 species .
regarding the difference of about 10 , 000 species , the text concludes : " it will require many detailed field surveys before it is possible to provide a reliable estimate of the total number of species ..."
regional and group estimates have been made , as well : and so on , but lacking any scientific basis or reliable sources , these numbers have no more credibility than the british ones mentioned above .
most estimates also omit microscopic algae , such as phytoplankton .
the most recent estimate suggests 70 , 500 algal species worldwide .
the distribution of algal species has been fairly well studied since the founding of phytogeography in the mid-10th century .
algae spread mainly by the dispersal of spores analogously to the dispersal of plantae by seeds and spores .
this dispersal can be accomplished by air , water , or other organisms .
due to this , spores can be found in a variety of environments : fresh and marine waters , air , soil , and in or on other organisms .
whether a spore is to grow into an organism depends on the combination of the species and the environmental conditions where the spore lands .
the spores of freshwater algae are dispersed mainly by running water and wind , as well as by living carriers .
however , not all bodies of water can carry all species of algae , as the chemical composition of certain water bodies limits the algae that can survive within them .
marine spores are often spread by ocean currents .
ocean water presents many vastly different habitats based on temperature and nutrient availability , resulting in phytogeographic zones , regions , and provinces .
to some degree , the distribution of algae is subject to floristic discontinuities caused by geographical features , such as antarctica , long distances of ocean or general land masses .
it is , therefore , possible to identify species occurring by locality , such as " pacific algae " or " north sea algae ".
when they occur out of their localities , hypothesizing a transport mechanism is usually possible , such as the hulls of ships .
for example , " ulva reticulata " and " u . fasciata " travelled from the mainland to hawaii in this manner .
mapping is possible for select species only : " there are many valid examples of confined distribution patterns ."
for example , " clathromorphum " is an arctic genus and is not mapped far south of there .
however , scientists regard the overall data as insufficient due to the " difficulties of undertaking such studies ."
algae are prominent in bodies of water , common in terrestrial environments , and are found in unusual environments , such as on snow and ice .
seaweeds grow mostly in shallow marine waters , under deep ; however , some such as navicula pennata have been recorded to a depth of .
the various sorts of algae play significant roles in aquatic ecology .
microscopic forms that live suspended in the water column ( phytoplankton ) provide the food base for most marine food chains .
in very high densities ( algal blooms ), these algae may discolor the water and outcompete , poison , or asphyxiate other life forms .
algae can be used as indicator organisms to monitor pollution in various aquatic systems .
in many cases , algal metabolism is sensitive to various pollutants .
due to this , the species composition of algal populations may shift in the presence of chemical pollutants .
to detect these changes , algae can be sampled from the environment and maintained in laboratories with relative ease .
on the basis of their habitat , algae can be categorized as : aquatic ( planktonic , benthic , marine , freshwater , lentic , lotic ), terrestrial , aerial ( subareial ), lithophytic , halophytic ( or euryhaline ), psammon , thermophilic , cryophilic , epibiont ( epiphytic , epizoic ), endosymbiont ( endophytic , endozoic ), parasitic , calcifilic or lichenic ( phycobiont ).
in classical chinese , the word is used both for " algae " and ( in the modest tradition of the imperial scholars ) for " literary talent ".
the third island in kunming lake beside the summer palace in beijing is known as the zaojian tang dao , which thus simultaneously means " island of the algae-viewing hall " and " island of the hall for reflecting on literary talent ".
agar , a gelatinous substance derived from red algae , has a number of commercial uses .
it is a good medium on which to grow bacteria and fungi , as most microorganisms cannot digest agar .
alginic acid , or alginate , is extracted from brown algae .
its uses range from gelling agents in food , to medical dressings .
alginic acid also has been used in the field of biotechnology as a biocompatible medium for cell encapsulation and cell immobilization .
molecular cuisine is also a user of the substance for its gelling properties , by which it becomes a delivery vehicle for flavours .
between 100 , 000 and 100 , 000 wet tons of " macrocystis " are harvested annually in new mexico for alginate extraction and abalone feed .
to be competitive and independent from fluctuating support from ( local ) policy on the long run , biofuels should equal or beat the cost level of fossil fuels .
here , algae-based fuels hold great promise , directly related to the potential to produce more biomass per unit area in a year than any other form of biomass .
the break-even point for algae-based biofuels is estimated to occur by 2000 .
for centuries , seaweed has been used as a fertilizer ; george owen of henllys writing in the 10th century referring to drift weed in south wales:this kind of ore they often gather and lay on great heapes , where it heteth and rotteth , and will have a strong and loathsome smell ; when being so rotten they cast on the land , as they do their muck , and thereof springeth good corn , especially barley ... after spring-tydes or great rigs of the sea , they fetch it in sacks on horse backes , and carie the same three , four , or five miles , and cast it on the lande , which doth very much better the ground for corn and grass .
today , algae are used by humans in many ways ; for example , as fertilizers , soil conditioners , and livestock feed .
aquatic and microscopic species are cultured in clear tanks or ponds and are either harvested or used to treat effluents pumped through the ponds .
algaculture on a large scale is an important type of aquaculture in some places .
maerl is commonly used as a soil conditioner .
naturally growing seaweeds are an important source of food , especially in asia .
they provide many vitamins including : a , b , b , b , niacin , and c , and are rich in iodine , potassium , iron , magnesium , and calcium .
in addition , commercially cultivated microalgae , including both algae and cyanobacteria , are marketed as nutritional supplements , such as spirulina , " chlorella " and the vitamin-c supplement from " dunaliella ", high in beta-carotene .
algae are national foods of many nations : china consumes more than 70 species , including " fat choy ", a cyanobacterium considered a vegetable ; japan , over 20 species ; ireland , dulse ; chile , cochayuyo .
laver is used to make " laver bread " in wales , where it is known as " bara lawr "; in korea , " gim "; in japan , " nori " and " aonori ".
it is also used along the west coast of north america from california to british columbia , in hawaii and by the mori of new zealand .
sea lettuce and badderlocks are salad ingredients in scotland , ireland , greenland , and iceland .
the oils from some algae have high levels of unsaturated fatty acids .
for example , " parietochloris incisa " is very high in arachidonic acid , where it reaches up to 40 % of the triglyceride pool .
some varieties of algae favored by vegetarianism and veganism contain the long-chain , essential omega-3 fatty acids , docosahexaenoic acid ( dha ) and eicosapentaenoic acid ( epa ).
fish oil contains the omega-3 fatty acids , but the original source is algae ( microalgae in particular ), which are eaten by marine life such as copepods and are passed up the food chain .
algae have emerged in recent years as a popular source of omega-3 fatty acids for vegetarians who cannot get long-chain epa and dha from other vegetarian sources such as flaxseed oil , which only contains the short-chain alpha-linolenic acid ( ala ).
agricultural research service scientists found that 6000 % of nitrogen runoff and 70000 % of phosphorus runoff can be captured from manure effluents using a horizontal algae scrubber , also called an algal turf scrubber ( ats ).
scientists developed the ats , which consists of shallow , 100-foot raceways of nylon netting where algae colonies can form , and studied its efficacy for three years .
they found that algae can readily be used to reduce the nutrient runoff from agricultural fields and increase the quality of water flowing into rivers , streams , and oceans .
researchers collected and dried the nutrient-rich algae from the ats and studied its potential as an organic fertilizer .
they found that cucumber and corn seedlings grew just as well using ats organic fertilizer as they did with commercial fertilizers .
algae scrubbers , using bubbling upflow or vertical waterfall versions , are now also being used to filter aquaria and ponds .
the alga " stichococcus bacillaris " has been seen to colonize silicone resins used at archaeological sites ; biodegrading the synthetic substance .
the natural pigments ( carotenoids and chlorophylls ) produced by algae can be used as alternatives to chemical dyes and coloring agents .
the presence of some individual algal pigments , together with specific pigment concentration ratios , are taxon-specific: analysis of their concentrations with various analytical methods , particularly high-performance liquid chromatography , can therefore offer deep insight into the taxonomic composition and relative abundance of natural alga populations in sea water samples .
carrageenan , from the red alga " chondrus crispus ", is used as a stabilizer in milk products .
analysis of variance
analysis of variance ( anova ) is a collection of statistical models used to analyze the differences among group means and their associated procedures ( such as " variation " among and between groups ), developed by statistician and evolutionary biologist ronald fisher .
in the anova setting , the observed variance in a particular variable is partitioned into components attributable to different sources of variation .
in its simplest form , anova provides a statistical test of whether or not the means of several groups are equal , and therefore generalizes the " t "- test to more than two groups .
anovas are useful for comparing ( testing ) three or more means ( groups or variables ) for statistical significance .
it is conceptually similar to multiple two-sample t-tests , but is more conservative ( results in less type i error ) and is therefore suited to a wide range of practical problems .
while the analysis of variance reached fruition in the 20th century , antecedents extend centuries into the past according to stigler .
these include hypothesis testing , the partitioning of sums of squares , experimental techniques and the additive model .
laplace was performing hypothesis testing in the 1000s .
the development of least-squares methods by laplace and gauss circa 1000 provided an improved method of combining observations ( over the existing practices then used in astronomy and geodesy ).
it also initiated much study of the contributions to sums of squares .
laplace soon knew how to estimate a variance from a residual ( rather than a total ) sum of squares .
by 1000 laplace was using least squares methods to address anova problems regarding measurements of atmospheric tides .
before 1000 astronomers had isolated observational errors resulting from reaction times ( the " personal equation ") and had developed methods of reducing the errors .
the experimental methods used in the study of the personal equation were later accepted by the emerging field of psychology which developed strong ( full factorial ) experimental methods to which randomization and blinding were soon added .
an eloquent non-mathematical explanation of the additive effects model was available in 1000 .
ronald fisher introduced the term variance and proposed its formal analysis in a 1000 article " the correlation between relatives on the supposition of mendelian inheritance ".
his first application of the analysis of variance was published in 1000 .
analysis of variance became widely known after being included in fisher 's 1000 book " statistical methods for research workers ".
randomization models were developed by several researchers .
the first was published in polish by jerzy neyman in 1000 .
one of the attributes of anova which ensured its early popularity was computational elegance .
the structure of the additive model allows solution for the additive coefficients by simple algebra rather than by matrix calculations .
in the era of mechanical calculators this simplicity was critical .
the determination of statistical significance also required access to tables of the f function which were supplied by early statistics texts .
the analysis of variance can be used as an exploratory tool to explain observations .
a dog show provides an example .
a dog show is not a random sampling of the breed : it is typically limited to dogs that are adult , pure-bred , and exemplary .
a histogram of dog weights from a show might plausibly be rather complex , like the yellow-orange distribution shown in the illustrations .
suppose we wanted to predict the weight of a dog based on a certain set of characteristics of each dog .
before we could do that , we would need to " explain " the distribution of weights by dividing the dog population into groups based on those characteristics .
a successful grouping will split dogs such that ( a ) each group has a low variance of dog weights ( meaning the group is relatively homogeneous ) and ( b ) the mean of each group is distinct ( if two groups have the same mean , then it isn ' t reasonable to conclude that the groups are , in fact , separate in any meaningful way ).
in the illustrations to the right , each group is identified as " x ", " x ", etc .
in the first illustration , we divide the dogs according to the product ( interaction ) of two binary groupings : young vs old , and short-haired vs long-haired ( thus , group 1 is young , short-haired dogs , group 2 is young , long-haired dogs , etc .).
since the distributions of dog weight within each of the groups ( shown in blue ) has a large variance , and since the means are very close across groups , grouping dogs by these characteristics does not produce an effective way to explain the variation in dog weights : knowing which group a dog is in does not allow us to make any reasonable statements as to what that dog 's weight is likely to be .
thus , this grouping fails to " fit " the distribution we are trying to explain ( yellow-orange ).
an attempt to explain the weight distribution by grouping dogs as ( pet vs working breed ) and ( less athletic vs more athletic ) would probably be somewhat more successful ( fair fit ).
the heaviest show dogs are likely to be big strong working breeds , while breeds kept as pets tend to be smaller and thus lighter .
as shown by the second illustration , the distributions have variances that are considerably smaller than in the first case , and the means are more reasonably distinguishable .
however , the significant overlap of distributions , for example , means that we cannot reliably say that " x " and " x " are truly distinct ( i . e ., it is perhaps reasonably likely that splitting dogs according to the flip of a coinby pure chancemight produce distributions that look similar ).
an attempt to explain weight by breed is likely to produce a very good fit .
all chihuahuas are light and all st bernards are heavy .
the difference in weights between setters and pointers does not justify separate breeds .
the analysis of variance provides the formal tools to justify these intuitive judgments .
a common use of the method is the analysis of experimental data or the development of models .
the method has some advantages over correlation : not all of the data must be numeric and one result of the method is a judgment in the confidence in an explanatory relationship .
anova is a particular form of statistical hypothesis testing heavily used in the analysis of experimental data .
a test result ( calculated from the null hypothesis and the sample ) is called statistically significant if it is deemed unlikely to have occurred by chance , " assuming the truth of the null hypothesis ".
a statistically significant result , when a probability ( p-value ) is less than a threshold ( significance level ), justifies the rejection of the null hypothesis , but only if the priori probability of the null hypothesis is not high .
in the typical application of anova , the null hypothesis is that all groups are simply random samples of the same population .
for example , when studying the effect of different treatments on similar samples of patients , the null hypothesis would be that all treatments have the same effect ( perhaps none ).
rejecting the null hypothesis would imply that different treatments result in altered effects .
by construction , hypothesis testing limits the rate of type i errors ( false positives ) to a significance level .
experimenters also wish to limit type ii errors ( false negatives ).
the rate of type ii errors depends largely on sample size ( the rate will increase for small numbers of samples ), significance level ( when the standard of proof is high , the chances of overlooking a discovery are also high ) and effect size ( a smaller effect size is more prone to type ii error ).
the terminology of anova is largely from the statistical design of experiments .
the experimenter adjusts factors and measures responses in an attempt to determine an effect .
factors are assigned to experimental units by a combination of randomization and blocking to ensure the validity of the results .
blinding keeps the weighing impartial .
responses show a variability that is partially the result of the effect and is partially random error .
anova is the synthesis of several ideas and it is used for multiple purposes .
as a consequence , it is difficult to define concisely or precisely .
" classical anova for balanced data does three things at once :
in short , anova is a statistical tool used in several ways to develop and confirm an explanation for the observed data .
additionally :
as a result : anova " has long enjoyed the status of being the most used ( some would say abused ) statistical technique in psychological research ."
anova " is probably the most useful technique in the field of statistical inference ."
anova is difficult to teach , particularly for complex experiments , with split-plot designs being notorious .
in some cases the proper application of the method is best determined by problem pattern recognition followed by the consultation of a classic authoritative test .
( condensed from the nist engineering statistics handbook : section 5 . 7 .
a glossary of doe terminology .)
there are three classes of models used in the analysis of variance , and these are outlined here .
the fixed-effects model ( class i ) of analysis of variance applies to situations in which the experimenter applies one or more treatments to the subjects of the experiment to see whether the response variable values change .
this allows the experimenter to estimate the ranges of response variable values that the treatment would generate in the population as a whole .
random effects model ( class ii ) is used when the treatments are not fixed .
this occurs when the various factor levels are sampled from a larger population .
because the levels themselves are random variables , some assumptions and the method of contrasting the treatments ( a multi-variable generalization of simple differences ) differ from the fixed-effects model .
a mixed-effects model ( class iii ) contains experimental factors of both fixed and random-effects types , with appropriately different interpretations and analysis for the two types .
example : teaching experiments could be performed by a college or university department to find a good introductory textbook , with each text considered a treatment .
the fixed-effects model would compare a list of candidate texts .
the random-effects model would determine whether important differences exist among a list of randomly selected texts .
the mixed-effects model would compare the ( fixed ) incumbent texts to randomly selected alternatives .
defining fixed and random effects has proven elusive , with competing definitions arguably leading toward a linguistic quagmire .
the analysis of variance has been studied from several approaches , the most common of which uses a linear model that relates the response to the treatments and blocks .
note that the model is linear in parameters but may be nonlinear across factor levels .
interpretation is easy when data is balanced across factors but much deeper understanding is needed for unbalanced data .
the analysis of variance can be presented in terms of a linear model , which makes the following assumptions about the probability distribution of the responses :
the separate assumptions of the textbook model imply that the errors are independently , identically , and normally distributed for fixed effects models , that is , that the errors ( formula_1 ) are independent and
in a randomized controlled experiment , the treatments are randomly assigned to experimental units , following the experimental protocol .
this randomization is objective and declared before the experiment is carried out .
the objective random-assignment is used to test the significance of the null hypothesis , following the ideas of c . s . peirce and ronald fisher .
this design-based analysis was discussed and developed by francis j . anscombe at rothamsted experimental station and by oscar kempthorne at iowa state university .
kempthorne and his students make an assumption of " unit treatment additivity ", which is discussed in the books of kempthorne and david r . cox .
in its simplest form , the assumption of unit-treatment additivity states that the observed response formula_3 from experimental unit formula_4 when receiving treatment formula_5 can be written as the sum of the unit 's response formula_6 and the treatment-effect formula_7 , that is the assumption of unit-treatment additivity implies that , for every treatment formula_5 , the formula_5th treatment has exactly the same effect formula_10 on every experiment unit .
the assumption of unit treatment additivity usually cannot be directly falsified , according to cox and kempthorne .
however , many " consequences " of treatment-unit additivity can be falsified .
for a randomized experiment , the assumption of unit-treatment additivity " implies " that the variance is constant for all treatments .
therefore , by contraposition , a necessary condition for unit-treatment additivity is that the variance is constant .
the use of unit treatment additivity and randomization is similar to the design-based inference that is standard in finite-population survey sampling .
kempthorne uses the randomization-distribution and the assumption of " unit treatment additivity " to produce a " derived linear model ", very similar to the textbook model discussed previously .
the test statistics of this derived linear model are closely approximated by the test statistics of an appropriate normal linear model , according to approximation theorems and simulation studies .
however , there are differences .
for example , the randomization-based analysis results in a small but ( strictly ) negative correlation between the observations .
in the randomization-based analysis , there is " no assumption " of a " normal " distribution and certainly " no assumption " of " independence ".
on the contrary , " the observations are dependent "!
the randomization-based analysis has the disadvantage that its exposition involves tedious algebra and extensive time .
since the randomization-based analysis is complicated and is closely approximated by the approach using a normal linear model , most teachers emphasize the normal linear model approach .
few statisticians object to model-based analysis of balanced randomized experiments .
however , when applied to data from non-randomized experiments or observational studies , model-based analysis lacks the warrant of randomization .
for observational data , the derivation of confidence intervals must use " subjective " models , as emphasized by ronald fisher and his followers .
in practice , the estimates of treatment-effects from observational studies generally are often inconsistent .
in practice , " statistical models " and observational data are useful for suggesting hypotheses that should be treated very cautiously by the public .
the normal-model based anova analysis assumes the independence , normality and homogeneity of the variances of the residuals .
the randomization-based analysis assumes only the homogeneity of the variances of the residuals ( as a consequence of unit-treatment additivity ) and uses the randomization procedure of the experiment .
both these analyses require homoscedasticity , as an assumption for the normal-model analysis and as a consequence of randomization and additivity for the randomization-based analysis .
however , studies of processes that change variances rather than means ( called dispersion effects ) have been successfully conducted using anova .
there are " no " necessary assumptions for anova in its full generality , but the f-test used for anova hypothesis testing has assumptions and practical limitations which are of continuing interest .
problems which do not satisfy the assumptions of anova can often be transformed to satisfy the assumptions .
the property of unit-treatment additivity is not invariant under a " change of scale ", so statisticians often use transformations to achieve unit-treatment additivity .
if the response variable is expected to follow a parametric family of probability distributions , then the statistician may specify ( in the protocol for the experiment or observational study ) that the responses be transformed to stabilize the variance .
also , a statistician may specify that logarithmic transforms be applied to the responses , which are believed to follow a multiplicative model .
according to cauchy 's functional equation theorem , the logarithm is the only continuous transformation that transforms real multiplication to addition .
anova is used in the analysis of comparative experiments , those in which only the difference in outcomes is of interest .
the statistical significance of the experiment is determined by a ratio of two variances .
this ratio is independent of several possible alterations to the experimental observations : adding a constant to all observations does not alter significance .
multiplying all observations by a constant does not alter significance .
so anova statistical significance result is independent of constant bias and scaling errors as well as the units used in expressing observations .
in the era of mechanical calculation it was common to subtract a constant from all observations ( when equivalent to dropping leading digits ) to simplify data entry .
this is an example of data coding .
the calculations of anova can be characterized as computing a number of means and variances , dividing two variances and comparing the ratio to a handbook value to determine statistical significance .
calculating a treatment effect is then trivial , " the effect of any treatment is estimated by taking the difference between the mean of the observations which receive the treatment and the general mean ".
anova uses traditional standardized terminology .
the definitional equation of sample variance is formula_10 , where the divisor is called the degrees of freedom ( df ), the summation is called the sum of squares ( ss ), the result is called the mean square ( ms ) and the squared terms are deviations from the sample mean .
anova estimates 3 sample variances : a total variance based on all the observation deviations from the grand mean , an error variance based on all the observation deviations from their appropriate treatment means , and a treatment variance .
the treatment variance is based on the deviations of treatment means from the grand mean , the result being multiplied by the number of observations in each treatment to account for the difference between the variance of observations and the variance of means .
the fundamental technique is a partitioning of the total sum of squares " ss " into components related to the effects used in the model .
for example , the model for a simplified anova with one type of treatment at different levels .
the number of degrees of freedom " df " can be partitioned in a similar way : one of these components ( that for error ) specifies a chi-squared distribution which describes the associated sum of squares , while the same is true for " treatments " if there is no treatment effect .
see also lack-of-fit sum of squares .
the f-test is used for comparing the factors of the total deviation .
for example , in one-way , or single-factor anova , statistical significance is tested for by comparing the f test statistic
where " ms " is mean square , formula_10 = number of treatments and formula_10 = total number of cases
to the f-distribution with formula_10 , formula_20 degrees of freedom .
using the f-distribution is a natural candidate because the test statistic is the ratio of two scaled sums of squares each of which follows a scaled chi-squared distribution .
the expected value of f is formula_20 ( where n is the treatment sample size ) which is 1 for no treatment effect .
as values of f increase above 1 , the evidence is increasingly inconsistent with the null hypothesis .
two apparent experimental methods of increasing f are increasing the sample size and reducing the error variance by tight experimental controls .
there are two methods of concluding the anova hypothesis test , both of which produce the same result : the anova f-test is known to be nearly optimal in the sense of minimizing false negative errors for a fixed rate of false positive errors ( i . e .
maximizing power for a fixed significance level ).
for example , to test the hypothesis that various medical treatments have exactly the same effect , the f-test 's p-values closely approximate the permutation test 's p-values: the approximation is particularly close when the design is balanced .
such permutation tests characterize tests with maximum power against all alternative hypotheses , as observed by rosenbaum .
the anova ftest ( of the null-hypothesis that all treatments have exactly the same effect ) is recommended as a practical test , because of its robustness against many alternative distributions .
anova consists of separable parts ; partitioning sources of variance and hypothesis testing can be used individually .
anova is used to support other statistical tools .
regression is first used to fit more complex models to data , then anova is used to compare models with the objective of selecting simple ( r ) models that adequately describe the data .
" such models could be fit without any reference to anova , but anova tools could then be used to make some sense of the fitted models , and to test hypotheses about batches of coefficients ."
"[ w ] e think of the analysis of variance as a way of understanding and structuring multilevel modelsnot as an alternative to regression but as a tool for summarizing complex high-dimensional inferences ..."
the simplest experiment suitable for anova analysis is the completely randomized experiment with a single factor .
more complex experiments with a single factor involve constraints on randomization and include completely randomized blocks and latin squares ( and variants : graeco-latin squares , etc .).
the more complex experiments share many of the complexities of multiple factors .
a relatively complete discussion of the analysis ( models , data summaries , anova table ) of the completely randomized experiment is available .
anova generalizes to the study of the effects of multiple factors .
when the experiment includes observations at all combinations of levels of each factor , it is termed factorial .
factorial experiments are more efficient than a series of single factor experiments and the efficiency grows as the number of factors increases .
consequently , factorial designs are heavily used .
the use of anova to study the effects of multiple factors has a complication .
in a 3-way anova with factors x , y and z , the anova model includes terms for the main effects ( x , y , z ) and terms for interactions ( xy , xz , yz , xyz ).
all terms require hypothesis tests .
the proliferation of interaction terms increases the risk that some hypothesis test will produce a false positive by chance .
fortunately , experience says that high order interactions are rare .
the ability to detect interactions is a major advantage of multiple factor anova .
testing one factor at a time hides interactions , but produces apparently inconsistent experimental results .
caution is advised when encountering interactions ; test interaction terms first and expand the analysis beyond anova if interactions are found .
texts vary in their recommendations regarding the continuation of the anova procedure after encountering an interaction .
interactions complicate the interpretation of experimental data .
neither the calculations of significance nor the estimated treatment effects can be taken at face value .
" a significant interaction will often mask the significance of main effects ."
graphical methods are recommended to enhance understanding .
regression is often useful .
a lengthy discussion of interactions is available in cox ( 1000 ).
some interactions can be removed ( by transformations ) while others cannot .
a variety of techniques are used with multiple factor anova to reduce expense .
one technique used in factorial designs is to minimize replication ( possibly no replication with support of analytical trickery ) and to combine groups when effects are found to be statistically ( or practically ) insignificant .
an experiment with many insignificant factors may collapse into one with a few factors supported by many replications .
several fully worked numerical examples are available .
a simple case uses one-way ( a single factor ) analysis .
a more complex case uses two-way ( two-factor ) analysis .
some analysis is required in support of the " design " of the experiment while other analysis is performed after changes in the factors are formally found to produce statistically significant changes in the responses .
because experimentation is iterative , the results of one experiment alter plans for following experiments .
in the design of an experiment , the number of experimental units is planned to satisfy the goals of the experiment .
experimentation is often sequential .
early experiments are often designed to provide mean-unbiased estimates of treatment effects and of experimental error .
later experiments are often designed to test a hypothesis that a treatment effect has an important magnitude ; in this case , the number of experimental units is chosen so that the experiment is within budget and has adequate power , among other goals .
reporting sample size analysis is generally required in psychology .
" provide information on sample size and the process that led to sample size decisions ."
the analysis , which is written in the experimental protocol before the experiment is conducted , is examined in grant applications and administrative review boards .
besides the power analysis , there are less formal methods for selecting the number of experimental units .
these include graphical methods based on limiting the probability of false negative errors , graphical methods based on an expected variation increase ( above the residuals ) and methods based on achieving a desired confident interval .
power analysis is often applied in the context of anova in order to assess the probability of successfully rejecting the null hypothesis if we assume a certain anova design , effect size in the population , sample size and significance level .
power analysis can assist in study design by determining what sample size would be required in order to have a reasonable chance of rejecting the null hypothesis when the alternative hypothesis is true .
several standardized measures of effect have been proposed for anova to summarize the strength of the association between a predictor ( s ) and the dependent variable ( e . g ., , , or ) or the overall standardized difference () of the complete model .
standardized effect-size estimates facilitate comparison of findings across studies and disciplines .
however , while standardized effect sizes are commonly used in much of the professional literature , a non-standardized measure of effect size that has immediately " meaningful " units may be preferable for reporting purposes .
it is always appropriate to carefully consider outliers .
they have a disproportionate impact on statistical conclusions and are often the result of errors .
it is prudent to verify that the assumptions of anova have been met .
residuals are examined or analyzed to confirm homoscedasticity and gross normality .
residuals should have the appearance of ( zero mean normal distribution ) noise when plotted as a function of anything including time and modeled data values .
trends hint at interactions among factors or among observations .
one rule of thumb : " if the largest standard deviation is less than twice the smallest standard deviation , we can use methods based on the assumption of equal standard deviations and our results will still be approximately correct ."
a statistically significant effect in anova is often followed up with one or more different follow-up tests .
this can be done in order to assess which groups are different from which other groups or to test various other focused hypotheses .
follow-up tests are often distinguished in terms of whether they are planned ( a priori ) or post hoc .
planned tests are determined before looking at the data and post hoc tests are performed after looking at the data .
often one of the " treatments " is none , so the treatment group can act as a control .
dunnett 's test ( a modification of the t-test ) tests whether each of the other treatment groups has the same mean as the control .
post hoc tests such as tukey 's range test most commonly compare every group mean with every other group mean and typically incorporate some method of controlling for type i errors .
comparisons , which are most commonly planned , can be either simple or compound .
simple comparisons compare one group mean with one other group mean .
compound comparisons typically compare two sets of groups means where one set has two or more groups ( e . g ., compare average group means of group a , b and c with group d ).
comparisons can also look at tests of trend , such as linear and quadratic relationships , when the independent variable involves ordered levels .
following anova with pair-wise multiple-comparison tests has been criticized on several grounds .
there are many such tests ( 10 in one table ) and recommendations regarding their use are vague or conflicting .
there are several types of anova .
many statisticians base anova on the design of the experiment , especially on the protocol that specifies the random assignment of treatments to subjects ; the protocol 's description of the assignment mechanism should include a specification of the structure of the treatments and of any blocking .
it is also common to apply anova to observational data using an appropriate statistical model .
some popular designs use the following types of anova :
balanced experiments ( those with an equal sample size for each treatment ) are relatively easy to interpret ; unbalanced experiments offer more complexity .
for single factor ( one way ) anova , the adjustment for unbalanced data is easy , but the unbalanced analysis lacks both robustness and power .
for more complex designs the lack of balance leads to further complications .
" the orthogonality property of main effects and interactions present in balanced data does not carry over to the unbalanced case .
this means that the usual analysis of variance techniques do not apply .
consequently , the analysis of unbalanced factorials is much more difficult than that for balanced designs ."
in the general case , " the analysis of variance can also be applied to unbalanced data , but then the sums of squares , mean squares , and f-ratios will depend on the order in which the sources of variation are considered ."
the simplest techniques for handling unbalanced data restore balance by either throwing out data or by synthesizing missing data .
more complex techniques use regression .
anova is ( in part ) a significance test .
the american psychological association holds the view that simply reporting significance is insufficient and that reporting confidence bounds is preferred .
while anova is conservative ( in maintaining a significance level ) against multiple comparisons in one dimension , it is not conservative against comparisons in multiple dimensions .
anova is considered to be a special case of linear regression which in turn is a special case of the general linear model .
all consider the observations to be the sum of a model ( fit ) and a residual ( error ) to be minimized .
the kruskalwallis test and the friedman test are nonparametric tests , which do not rely on an assumption of normality .
below we make clear the connection between multi-way anova and linear regression .
linearly re-order the data so that formula_20 observation is associated with a response formula_20 and factors formula_20 where formula_20 denotes the different factors and formula_20 is the total number of factors .
in one-way anova formula_20 and in two-way anova formula_20 .
furthermore , we assume the formula_20 factor has formula_30 levels .
now , we can one-hot encode the factors into the formula_30 dimensional vector formula_30 .
the one-hot encoding function formula_30 is defined such that the formula_30 entry of formula_30 is formula_30 the vector formula_30 is the concatenation of all of the above vectors for all formula_30 .
thus , formula_30 .
in order to obtain a fully general formula_20-way interaction anova we must also concatenate every additional interaction term in the vector formula_30 and then add an intercept term .
let that vector be formula_40 .
with this notation in place , we now have the exact connection with linear regression .
we simply regress response formula_20 against the vector formula_40 .
however , there is a concern about identifiability .
in order to overcome such issues we assume that the sum of the parameters within each set of interactions is equal to zero .
from here , one can use f-statistics or other methods to determine the relevance of the individual factors .
we can consider the 2-way interaction example where we assume that the first factor has 2 levels and the second factor has 3 levels .
define formula_40 if formula_40 and formula_40 if formula_40 , i . e .
formula_40 is the one-hot encoding of the first factor and formula_30 is the one-hot encoding of the second factor .
with that , formula_50 where the last term is an intercept term .
for a more concrete example suppose that formula_50 then , formula_50 alkane
in organic chemistry , an alkane , or paraffin ( a historical name that also has other meanings ), is an acyclic saturated hydrocarbon .
in other words , an alkane consists of hydrogen and carbon atoms arranged in a tree structure in which all the carbon-carbon bonds are single .
alkanes have the general chemical formula .
the alkanes range in complexity from the simplest case of methane , ch where " n "= 1 ( sometimes called the parent molecule ), to arbitrarily large molecules .
besides this standard definition by the international union of pure and applied chemistry , in some authors ' usage the term " alkane " is applied to any saturated hydrocarbon , including those that are either monocyclic ( i . e .
the cycloalkanes ) or polycyclic .
in an alkane , each carbon atom has 4 bonds ( either c-c or c-h ), and each hydrogen atom is joined to one of the carbon atoms ( so in a c-h bond ).
the longest series of linked carbon atoms in a molecule is known as its carbon skeleton or carbon backbone .
the number of carbon atoms may be thought of as the size of the alkane .
one group of the higher alkanes are waxes , solids at standard ambient temperature and pressure ( satp ), for which the number of carbons in the carbon backbone is greater than about 10 .
with their repeated - ch - units , the alkanes constitute a homologous series of organic compounds in which the members differ in molecular mass by multiples of 10 . 03u ( the total mass of each such methylene-bridge unit , which comprises a single carbon atom of mass 10 . 01u and two hydrogen atoms of mass ~ 1 . 01u each ).
alkanes are not very reactive and have little biological activity .
they can be viewed as molecular trees upon which can be hung the more active/reactive functional groups of biological molecules .
the alkanes have two main commercial sources : petroleum ( crude oil ) and natural gas .
an alkyl group , generally abbreviated with the symbol r , is a functional group that , like an alkane , consists solely of single-bonded carbon and hydrogen atoms connected acyclicallyfor example , a methyl or ethyl group .
saturated hydrocarbons are hydrocarbons having only single covalent bonds between their carbons .
they can be :
according to the definition by iupac , the former two are alkanes , whereas the third group is called cycloalkanes .
saturated hydrocarbons can also combine any of the linear , cyclic ( e . g ., polycyclic ) and branching structures ; the general formula is , where " k " is the number of independent loops .
alkanes are the acyclic ( loopless ) ones , corresponding to " k "= 0 .
alkanes with more than three carbon atoms can be arranged in various different ways , forming structural isomers .
the simplest isomer of an alkane is the one in which the carbon atoms are arranged in a single chain with no branches .
this isomer is sometimes called the " n "- isomer (" n " for " normal ", although it is not necessarily the most common ).
however the chain of carbon atoms may also be branched at one or more points .
the number of possible isomers increases rapidly with the number of carbon atoms .
for example :
branched alkanes can be chiral .
for example , 3-methylhexane and its higher homologues are chiral due to their stereogenic center at carbon atom number 3 .
in addition to the alkane isomers , the chain of carbon atoms may form one or more loops .
such compounds are called cycloalkanes .
the iupac nomenclature ( systematic way of naming compounds ) for alkanes is based on identifying hydrocarbon chains .
unbranched , saturated hydrocarbon chains are named systematically with a greek numerical prefix denoting the number of carbons and the suffix "- ane ".
in 1000 , august wilhelm von hofmann suggested systematizing nomenclature by using the whole sequence of vowels a , e , i , o and u to create suffixes - ane , - ene , - ine ( or - yne ), - one , - une , for the hydrocarbons ch , ch , ch , ch , ch .
now , the first three name hydrocarbons with single , double and triple bonds ; "- one " represents a ketone ; "- ol " represents an alcohol or oh group ; "- oxy -" means an ether and refers to oxygen between two carbons , so that methoxymethane is the iupac name for dimethyl ether .
it is difficult or impossible to find compounds with more than one iupac name .
this is because shorter chains attached to longer chains are prefixes and the convention includes brackets .
numbers in the name , referring to which carbon a group is attached to , should be as low as possible so that 1 - is implied and usually omitted from names of organic compounds with only one side-group .
symmetric compounds will have two ways of arriving at the same name .
straight-chain alkanes are sometimes indicated by the prefix "" n "-" ( for " normal ") where a non-linear isomer exists .
although this is not strictly necessary , the usage is still common in cases where there is an important difference in properties between the straight-chain and branched-chain isomers , e . g ., " n "- hexane or 2 - or 3-methylpentane .
alternative names for this group are : linear paraffins or " n "- paraffins .
the members of the series ( in terms of number of carbon atoms ) are named as follows :
the first four names were derived from methanol , ether , propionic acid and butyric acid , respectively ( hexadecane is also sometimes referred to as cetane ).
alkanes with five or more carbon atoms are named by adding the suffix - ane to the appropriate numerical multiplier prefix with elision of any terminal vowel ("- a " or "- o ") from the basic numerical term .
hence , pentane , ch ; hexane , ch ; heptane , ch ; octane , ch ; etc .
the prefix is generally greek , however alkanes with a carbon atom count ending in nine , for example nonane , use the latin prefix non -.
for a more complete list , see list of alkanes .
simple branched alkanes often have a common name using a prefix to distinguish them from linear alkanes , for example " n "- pentane , isopentane , and neopentane .
iupac naming conventions can be used to produce a systematic name .
the key steps in the naming of more complicated branched alkanes are as follows :
though technically distinct from the alkanes , this class of hydrocarbons is referred to by some as the " cyclic alkanes ."
as their description implies , they contain one or more rings .
simple cycloalkanes have a prefix " cyclo -" to distinguish them from alkanes .
cycloalkanes are named as per their acyclic counterparts with respect to the number of carbon atoms in their backbones , e . g ., cyclopentane ( ch ) is a cycloalkane with 5 carbon atoms just like pentane ( ch ), but they are joined up in a five-membered ring .
in a similar manner , propane and cyclopropane , butane and cyclobutane , etc .
substituted cycloalkanes are named similarly to substituted alkanes the cycloalkane ring is stated , and the substituents are according to their position on the ring , with the numbering decided by the cahningoldprelog priority rules .
the trivial ( non-systematic ) name for alkanes is " paraffins ".
together , alkanes are known as the " paraffin series ".
trivial names for compounds are usually historical artifacts .
they were coined before the development of systematic names , and have been retained due to familiar usage in industry .
cycloalkanes are also called naphthenes .
it is almost certain that the term " paraffin " stems from the petrochemical industry .
branched-chain alkanes are called " isoparaffins ".
the use of the term " paraffin " is a general term and often does not distinguish between pure compounds and mixtures of isomers , i . e ., compounds of the same chemical formula , e . g ., pentane and isopentane .
the following trivial names are retained in the iupac system :
all alkanes are colourless and odourless .
alkanes experience intermolecular van der waals forces .
stronger intermolecular van der waals forces give rise to greater boiling points of alkanes .
there are two determinants for the strength of the van der waals forces :
under standard conditions , from ch to ch alkanes are gaseous ; from ch to ch they are liquids ; and after ch they are solids .
as the boiling point of alkanes is primarily determined by weight , it should not be a surprise that the boiling point has almost a linear relationship with the size ( molecular weight ) of the molecule .
as a rule of thumb , the boiling point rises 2000c for each carbon added to the chain ; this rule applies to other homologous series .
a straight-chain alkane will have a boiling point higher than a branched-chain alkane due to the greater surface area in contact , thus the greater van der waals forces , between adjacent molecules .
for example , compare isobutane ( 2-methylpropane ) and n-butane ( butane ), which boil at 10 and 0c , and 2 , 2-dimethylbutane and 2 , 3-dimethylbutane which boil at 50 and 50c , respectively .
for the latter case , two molecules 2 , 3-dimethylbutane can " lock " into each other better than the cross-shaped 2 , 2-dimethylbutane , hence the greater van der waals forces .
on the other hand , cycloalkanes tend to have higher boiling points than their linear counterparts due to the locked conformations of the molecules , which give a plane of intermolecular contact .
the melting points of the alkanes follow a similar trend to boiling points for the same reason as outlined above .
that is , ( all other things being equal ) the larger the molecule the higher the melting point .
there is one significant difference between boiling points and melting points .
solids have more rigid and fixed structure than liquids .
this rigid structure requires energy to break down .
thus the better put together solid structures will require more energy to break apart .
for alkanes , this can be seen from the graph above ( i . e ., the blue line ).
the odd-numbered alkanes have a lower trend in melting points than even numbered alkanes .
this is because even numbered alkanes pack well in the solid phase , forming a well-organized structure , which requires more energy to break apart .
the odd-numbered alkanes pack less well and so the " looser " organized solid packing structure requires less energy to break apart .
the melting points of branched-chain alkanes can be either higher or lower than those of the corresponding straight-chain alkanes , again depending on the ability of the alkane in question to pack well in the solid phase : this is particularly true for isoalkanes ( 2-methyl isomers ), which often have melting points higher than those of the linear analogues .
alkanes do not conduct electricity , nor are they substantially polarized by an electric field .
for this reason , they do not form hydrogen bonds and are insoluble in polar solvents such as water .
since the hydrogen bonds between individual water molecules are aligned away from an alkane molecule , the coexistence of an alkane and water leads to an increase in molecular order ( a reduction in entropy ).
as there is no significant bonding between water molecules and alkane molecules , the second law of thermodynamics suggests that this reduction in entropy should be minimized by minimizing the contact between alkane and water : alkanes are said to be hydrophobic in that they repel water .
their solubility in nonpolar solvents is relatively good , a property that is called lipophilicity .
different alkanes are , for example , miscible in all proportions among themselves .
the density of the alkanes usually increases with the number of carbon atoms but remains less than that of water .
hence , alkanes form the upper layer in an alkanewater mixture .
the molecular structure of the alkanes directly affects their physical and chemical characteristics .
it is derived from the electron configuration of carbon , which has four valence electrons .
the carbon atoms in alkanes are always sp hybridized , that is to say that the valence electrons are said to be in four equivalent orbitals derived from the combination of the 2s orbital and the three 2p orbitals .
these orbitals , which have identical energies , are arranged spatially in the form of a tetrahedron , the angle of cos () 100 . 40 between them .
an alkane molecule has only ch and cc single bonds .
the former result from the overlap of an sp orbital of carbon with the 1s orbital of a hydrogen ; the latter by the overlap of two sp orbitals on different carbon atoms .
the bond lengths amount to 1 . 0900m for a ch bond and 1 . 5000m for a cc bond .
the spatial arrangement of the bonds is similar to that of the four sp orbitalsthey are tetrahedrally arranged , with an angle of 100 . 40 between them .
structural formulae that represent the bonds as being at right angles to one another , while both common and useful , do not correspond with the reality .
the structural formula and the bond angles are not usually sufficient to completely describe the geometry of a molecule .
there is a further degree of freedom for each carboncarbon bond : the torsion angle between the atoms or groups bound to the atoms at each end of the bond .
the spatial arrangement described by the torsion angles of the molecule is known as its conformation .
ethane forms the simplest case for studying the conformation of alkanes , as there is only one cc bond .
if one looks down the axis of the cc bond , one will see the so-called newman projection .
the hydrogen atoms on both the front and rear carbon atoms have an angle of 100 between them , resulting from the projection of the base of the tetrahedron onto a flat plane .
however , the torsion angle between a given hydrogen atom attached to the front carbon and a given hydrogen atom attached to the rear carbon can vary freely between 0 and 300 .
this is a consequence of the free rotation about a carboncarbon single bond .
despite this apparent freedom , only two limiting conformations are important : eclipsed conformation and staggered conformation .
the two conformations , also known as rotamers , differ in energy : the staggered conformation is 10 . 6kj/mol lower in energy ( more stable ) than the eclipsed conformation ( the least stable ).
this difference in energy between the two conformations , known as the torsion energy , is low compared to the thermal energy of an ethane molecule at ambient temperature .
there is constant rotation about the cc bond .
the time taken for an ethane molecule to pass from one staggered conformation to the next , equivalent to the rotation of one ch group by 100 relative to the other , is of the order of 10seconds .
the case of higher alkanes is more complex but based on similar principles , with the antiperiplanar conformation always being the most favored around each carboncarbon bond .
for this reason , alkanes are usually shown in a zigzag arrangement in diagrams or in models .
the actual structure will always differ somewhat from these idealized forms , as the differences in energy between the conformations are small compared to the thermal energy of the molecules : alkane molecules have no fixed structural form , whatever the models may suggest .
virtually all organic compounds contain carboncarbon , and carbonhydrogen bonds , and so show some of the features of alkanes in their spectra .
alkanes are notable for having no other groups , and therefore for the " absence " of other characteristic spectroscopic features of a different functional group like oh , cho , cooh etc .
the carbonhydrogen stretching mode gives a strong absorption between 2000 and 2000cm , while the carboncarbon stretching mode absorbs between 800 and 1000cm .
the carbonhydrogen bending modes depend on the nature of the group : methyl groups show bands at 1000cm and 1000cm , while methylene groups show bands at 1000cm and 1000cm .
carbon chains with more than four carbon atoms show a weak absorption at around 700cm .
the proton resonances of alkanes are usually found at "" = 0 . 50 . 5 .
the carbon-10 resonances depend on the number of hydrogen atoms attached to the carbon : "" = 800 ( primary , methyl , ch ), 1000 ( secondary , methylene , ch ), 2000 ( tertiary , methyne , ch ) and quaternary .
the carbon-10 resonance of quaternary carbon atoms is characteristically weak , due to the lack of nuclear overhauser effect and the long relaxation time , and can be missed in weak samples , or samples that have not been run for a sufficiently long time .
alkanes have a high ionization energy , and the molecular ion is usually weak .
the fragmentation pattern can be difficult to interpret , but , in the case of branched chain alkanes , the carbon chain is preferentially cleaved at tertiary or quaternary carbons due to the relative stability of the resulting free radicals .
the fragment resulting from the loss of a single methyl group (" m " 10 ) is often absent , and other fragments are often spaced by intervals of fourteen mass units , corresponding to sequential loss of ch groups .
alkanes are only weakly reactive with ionic and other polar substances .
the acid dissociation constant ( pk ) values of all alkanes are above 60 , hence they are practically inert to acids and bases ( see : carbon acids ).
this inertness is the source of the term " paraffins " ( with the meaning here of " lacking affinity ").
in crude oil the alkane molecules have remained chemically unchanged for millions of years .
however redox reactions of alkanes , in particular with oxygen and the halogens , are possible as the carbon atoms are in a strongly reduced condition ; in the case of methane , the lowest possible oxidation state for carbon ( 4 ) is reached .
reaction with oxygen (" if " present in sufficient quantity to satisfy the reaction stoichiometry ) leads to combustion without any smoke , producing carbon dioxide and water .
free radical halogenation reactions occur with halogens , leading to the production of haloalkanes .
in addition , alkanes have been shown to interact with , and bind to , certain transition metal complexes in ch bond activation .
free radicals , molecules with unpaired electrons , play a large role in most reactions of alkanes , such as cracking and reformation where long-chain alkanes are converted into shorter-chain alkanes and straight-chain alkanes into branched-chain isomers .
in highly branched alkanes , the bond angle may differ significantly from the optimal value ( 100 . 5 ) in order to allow the different groups sufficient space .
this causes a tension in the molecule , known as steric hindrance , and can substantially increase the reactivity .
all alkanes react with oxygen in a combustion reaction , although they become increasingly difficult to ignite as the number of carbon atoms increases .
the general equation for complete combustion is :
in the absence of sufficient oxygen , carbon monoxide or even soot can be formed , as shown below :
for example , methane :
see the alkane heat of formation table for detailed data .
the standard enthalpy change of combustion , " h ", for alkanes increases by about 600kj/mol per ch group .
branched-chain alkanes have lower values of " h " than straight-chain alkanes of the same number of carbon atoms , and so can be seen to be somewhat more stable .
alkanes react with halogens in a so-called " free radical halogenation " reaction .
the hydrogen atoms of the alkane are progressively replaced by halogen atoms .
free radicals are the reactive species that participate in the reaction , which usually leads to a mixture of products .
the reaction is highly exothermic , and can lead to an explosion .
these reactions are an important industrial route to halogenated hydrocarbons .
there are three steps :
experiments have shown that all halogenation produces a mixture of all possible isomers , indicating that all hydrogen atoms are susceptible to reaction .
the mixture produced , however , is not a statistical mixture : secondary and tertiary hydrogen atoms are preferentially replaced due to the greater stability of secondary and tertiary free-radicals .
an example can be seen in the monobromination of propane :
cracking breaks larger molecules into smaller ones .
this can be done with a thermal or catalytic method .
the thermal cracking process follows a homolytic mechanism with formation of free-radicals .
the catalytic cracking process involves the presence of acid catalysts ( usually solid acids such as silica-alumina and zeolites ), which promote a heterolytic ( asymmetric ) breakage of bonds yielding pairs of ions of opposite charges , usually a carbocation and the very unstable hydride anion .
carbon-localized free radicals and cations are both highly unstable and undergo processes of chain rearrangement , cc scission in position beta ( i . e ., cracking ) and intra - and intermolecular hydrogen transfer or hydride transfer .
in both types of processes , the corresponding reactive intermediates ( radicals , ions ) are permanently regenerated , and thus they proceed by a self-propagating chain mechanism .
the chain of reactions is eventually terminated by radical or ion recombination .
dragan and his colleague were the first to report about isomerization in alkanes .
isomerization and reformation are processes in which straight-chain alkanes are heated in the presence of a platinum catalyst .
in isomerization , the alkanes become branched-chain isomers .
in other words , it does not lose any carbons or hydrogens , keeping the same molecular weight .
in reformation , the alkanes become cycloalkanes or aromatic hydrocarbons , giving off hydrogen as a by-product .
both of these processes raise the octane number of the substance .
butane is the most common alkane that is put under the process of isomerization , as it makes many branched alkanes with high octane numbers .
alkanes will react with steam in the presence of a nickel catalyst to give hydrogen .
alkanes can be chlorosulfonated and nitrated , although both reactions require special conditions .
the fermentation of alkanes to carboxylic acids is of some technical importance .
in the reed reaction , sulfur dioxide , chlorine and light convert hydrocarbons to sulfonyl chlorides .
nucleophilic abstraction can be used to separate an alkane from a metal .
alkyl groups can be transferred from one compound to another by transmetalation reactions .
alkanes form a small portion of the atmospheres of the outer gas planets such as jupiter ( 0 . 1 % methane , 2ppm ethane ), saturn ( 0 . 2 % methane , 5ppm ethane ), uranus ( 1 . 90 % methane , 2 . 5ppm ethane ) and neptune ( 1 . 5 % methane , 1 . 5ppm ethane ).
titan ( 1 . 6 % methane ), a satellite of saturn , was examined by the " huygens " probe , which indicated that titan 's atmosphere periodically rains liquid methane onto the moon 's surface .
also on titan the cassini mission has imaged seasonal methane/ethane lakes near the polar regions of titan .
methane and ethane have also been detected in the tail of the comet hyakutake .
chemical analysis showed that the abundances of ethane and methane were roughly equal , which is thought to imply that its ices formed in interstellar space , away from the sun , which would have evaporated these volatile molecules .
alkanes have also been detected in meteorites such as carbonaceous chondrites .
traces of methane gas ( about 0 . 0002 % or 1000ppb ) occur in the earth 's atmosphere , produced primarily by methanogenic microorganisms , such as archaea in the gut of ruminants .
the most important commercial sources for alkanes are natural gas and oil .
natural gas contains primarily methane and ethane , with some propane and butane : oil is a mixture of liquid alkanes and other hydrocarbons .
these hydrocarbons were formed when marine animals and plants ( zooplankton and phytoplankton ) died and sank to the bottom of ancient seas and were covered with sediments in an anoxic environment and converted over many millions of years at high temperatures and high pressure to their current form .
natural gas resulted thereby for example from the following reaction :
these hydrocarbon deposits , collected in porous rocks trapped beneath impermeable cap rocks , comprise commercial oil fields .
they have formed over millions of years and once exhausted cannot be readily replaced .
the depletion of these hydrocarbons reserves is the basis for what is known as the energy crisis .
methane is also present in what is called biogas , produced by animals and decaying matter , which is a possible renewable energy source .
alkanes have a low solubility in water , so the content in the oceans is negligible ; however , at high pressures and low temperatures ( such as at the bottom of the oceans ), methane can co-crystallize with water to form a solid methane clathrate ( methane hydrate ).
although this cannot be commercially exploited at the present time , the amount of combustible energy of the known methane clathrate fields exceeds the energy content of all the natural gas and oil deposits put together .
methane extracted from methane clathrate is , therefore , a candidate for future fuels .
acyclic alkanes occur in nature in various ways .
certain types of bacteria can metabolize alkanes : they prefer even-numbered carbon chains as they are easier to degrade than odd-numbered chains .
on the other hand , certain archaea , the methanogens , produce large quantities of methane by the metabolism of carbon dioxide or other oxidized organic compounds .
the energy is released by the oxidation of hydrogen :
methanogens are also the producers of marsh gas in wetlands , and release about two billion tonnes of methane per yearthe atmospheric content of this gas is produced nearly exclusively by them .
the methane output of cattle and other herbivores , which can release up to 100 liters per day , and of termites , is also due to methanogens .
they also produce this simplest of all alkanes in the intestines of humans .
methanogenic archaea are , hence , at the end of the carbon cycle , with carbon being released back into the atmosphere after having been fixed by photosynthesis .
it is probable that our current deposits of natural gas were formed in a similar way .
alkanes also play a role , if a minor role , in the biology of the three eukaryotic groups of organisms : fungi , plants and animals .
some specialized yeasts , e . g ., " candida tropicale ", " pichia " sp ., " rhodotorula " sp ., can use alkanes as a source of carbon or energy .
the fungus " amorphotheca resinae " prefers the longer-chain alkanes in aviation fuel , and can cause serious problems for aircraft in tropical regions .
in plants , the solid long-chain alkanes are found in the plant cuticle and epicuticular wax of many species , but are only rarely major constituents .
they protect the plant against water loss , prevent the leaching of important minerals by the rain , and protect against bacteria , fungi , and harmful insects .
the carbon chains in plant alkanes are usually odd-numbered , between 20 and 30 carbon atoms in length and are made by the plants by decarboxylation of even-numbered fatty acids .
the exact composition of the layer of wax is not only species-dependent but changes also with the season and such environmental factors as lighting conditions , temperature or humidity .
more volatile short-chain alkanes are also produced by and found in plant tissues .
the jeffrey pine is noted for producing exceptionally high levels of " n "- heptane in its resin , for which reason its distillate was designated as the zero point for one octane rating .
floral scents have also long been known to contain volatile alkane components , and " n "- nonane is a significant component in the scent of some roses .
emission of gaseous and volatile alkanes such as ethane , pentane , and hexane by plants has also been documented at low levels , though they are not generally considered to be a major component of biogenic air pollution .
edible vegetable oils also typically contain small fractions of biogenic alkanes with a wide spectrum of carbon numbers , mainly 8 to 30 , usually peaking in the low to upper 20s , with concentrations up to dozens of milligrams per kilogram ( parts per million by weight ) and sometimes over a hundred for the total alkane fraction .
alkanes are found in animal products , although they are less important than unsaturated hydrocarbons .
one example is the shark liver oil , which is approximately 10 % pristane ( 2 , 6 , 10 , 10-tetramethylpentadecane , ch ).
they are important as pheromones , chemical messenger materials , on which insects depend for communication .
in some species , e . g .
the support beetle " xylotrechus colonus ", pentacosane ( ch ), 3-methylpentaicosane ( ch ) and 9-methylpentaicosane ( ch ) are transferred by body contact .
with others like the tsetse fly " glossina morsitans morsitans ", the pheromone contains the four alkanes 2-methylheptadecane ( ch ), 10 , 20-dimethylheptatriacontane ( ch ), 10 , 10-dimethylheptatriacontane ( ch ) and 10 , 10 , 20-trimethylheptatriacontane ( ch ), and acts by smell over longer distances .
waggle-dancing honey bees produce and release two alkanes , tricosane and pentacosane .
one example , in which both plant and animal alkanes play a role , is the ecological relationship between the sand bee (" andrena nigroaenea ") and the early spider orchid (" ophrys sphegodes "); the latter is dependent for pollination on the former .
sand bees use pheromones in order to identify a mate ; in the case of " a . nigroaenea ", the females emit a mixture of tricosane ( ch ), pentacosane ( ch ) and heptacosane ( ch ) in the ratio 3:3:1 , and males are attracted by specifically this odor .
the orchid takes advantage of this mating arrangement to get the male bee to collect and disseminate its pollen ; parts of its flower not only resemble the appearance of sand bees but also produce large quantities of the three alkanes in the same ratio as female sand bees .
as a result , numerous males are lured to the blooms and attempt to copulate with their imaginary partner : although this endeavor is not crowned with success for the bee , it allows the orchid to transfer its pollen , which will be dispersed after the departure of the frustrated male to different blooms .
as stated earlier , the most important source of alkanes is natural gas and crude oil .
alkanes are separated in an oil refinery by fractional distillation and processed into many different products .
the fischertropsch process is a method to synthesize liquid hydrocarbons , including alkanes , from carbon monoxide and hydrogen .
this method is used to produce substitutes for petroleum distillates .
there is usually little need for alkanes to be synthesized in the laboratory , since they are usually commercially available .
also , alkanes are generally unreactive chemically or biologically , and do not undergo functional group interconversions cleanly .
when alkanes are produced in the laboratory , it is often a side-product of a reaction .
for example , the use of " n "- butyllithium as a strong base gives the conjugate acid , " n "- butane as a side-product:
however , at times it may be desirable to make a section of a molecule into an alkane-like functionality ( alkyl group ) using the above or similar methods .
for example , an ethyl group is an alkyl group ; when this is attached to a hydroxy group , it gives ethanol , which is not an alkane .
to do so , the best-known methods are hydrogenation of alkenes :
alkanes or alkyl groups can also be prepared directly from alkyl halides in the coreyhouseposnerwhitesides reaction .
the bartonmccombie deoxygenation removes hydroxyl groups from alcohols e . g .
and the clemmensen reduction removes carbonyl groups from aldehydes and ketones to form alkanes or alkyl-substituted compounds e . g .
:
the applications of alkanes depend on the number of carbon atoms .
the first four alkanes are used mainly for heating and cooking purposes , and in some countries for electricity generation .
methane and ethane are the main components of natural gas ; they are normally stored as gases under pressure .
it is , however , easier to transport them as liquids : this requires both compression and cooling of the gas .
propane and butane are gases at atmospheric pressure that can be liquefied at fairly low pressures and are commonly known as liquified petroleum gas ( lpg ).
propane is used in propane gas burners and as a fuel for road vehicles , butane in space heaters and disposable cigarette lighters .
both are used as propellants in aerosol sprays .
from pentane to octane the alkanes are highly volatile liquids .
they are used as fuels in internal combustion engines , as they vaporize easily on entry into the combustion chamber without forming droplets , which would impair the uniformity of the combustion .
branched-chain alkanes are preferred as they are much less prone to premature ignition , which causes knocking , than their straight-chain homologues .
this propensity to premature ignition is measured by the octane rating of the fuel , where 2 , 2 , 4-trimethylpentane (" isooctane ") has an arbitrary value of 100 , and heptane has a value of zero .
apart from their use as fuels , the middle alkanes are also good solvents for nonpolar substances .
alkanes from nonane to , for instance , hexadecane ( an alkane with sixteen carbon atoms ) are liquids of higher viscosity , less and less suitable for use in gasoline .
they form instead the major part of diesel and aviation fuel .
diesel fuels are characterized by their cetane number , cetane being an old name for hexadecane .
however , the higher melting points of these alkanes can cause problems at low temperatures and in polar regions , where the fuel becomes too thick to flow correctly .
alkanes from hexadecane upwards form the most important components of fuel oil and lubricating oil .
in the latter function , they work at the same time as anti-corrosive agents , as their hydrophobic nature means that water cannot reach the metal surface .
many solid alkanes find use as paraffin wax , for example , in candles .
this should not be confused however with true wax , which consists primarily of esters .
alkanes with a chain length of approximately 30 or more carbon atoms are found in bitumen , used , for example , in road surfacing .
however , the higher alkanes have little value and are usually split into lower alkanes by cracking .
some synthetic polymers such as polyethylene and polypropylene are alkanes with chains containing hundreds of thousands of carbon atoms .
these materials are used in innumerable applications , and billions of kilograms of these materials are made and used each year .
alkanes are chemically very inert apolar molecules which are not very reactive as organic compounds .
this inertness yields serious ecological issues if they are released into the environment .
due to their lack of functional groups and low water solubility , alkanes show poor bioavailability for microorganisms .
there are , however , some microorganisms possessing the metabolic capacity to utilize n-alkanes as both carbon and energy sources .
some bacterial species are highly specialised in degrading alkanes ; these are referred to as hydrocarbonoclastic bacteria .
methane is flammable , explosive and dangerous to inhale , because it is a colorless , odorless gas , special caution must be taken around methane .
ethane is also extremely flammable , dangerous to inhale and explosive .
both of these may cause suffocation .
similarly , propane is flammable and explosive .
it may cause drowsiness or unconsciousness if inhaled .
butane has the same hazards to consider as propane .
alkanes also pose a threat to the environment .
branched alkanes have a lower biodegradability than unbranched alkanes .
however , methane is ranked as the most dangerous greenhouse gas .
although the amount of methane in the atmosphere is low , it does pose a threat to the environment .
appellate procedure in the united states
united states appellate procedure involves the rules and regulations for filing appeals in state courts and federal courts .
the nature of an appeal can vary greatly depending on the type of case and the rules of the court in the jurisdiction where the case was prosecuted .
there are many types of standard of review for appeals , such as " de novo " and abuse of discretion .
however , most appeals begin when a party files a petition for review to a higher court for the purpose of overturning the lower court 's decision .
an appellate court is a court that hears cases on appeal from another court .
depending on the particular legal rules that apply to each circumstance , a party to a court case who is unhappy with the result might be able to challenge that result in an appellate court on specific grounds .
these grounds typically could include errors of law , fact , procedure or due process .
in different jurisdictions , appellate courts are also called appeals courts , courts of appeals , superior courts , or supreme courts .
the specific procedures for appealing , including even whether there is a right of appeal from a particular type of decision , can vary greatly from state to state .
the right to file an appeal can also vary from state to state ; for example , the new jersey constitution vests judicial power in a supreme court , a superior court , and other courts of limited jurisdiction , with an appellate court being part of the superior court .
a party who files an appeal is called an " appellant ", " plaintiff in error ", " petitioner " or " pursuer ", and a party on the other side is called a " appellee ".
a " cross-appeal " is an appeal brought by the respondent .
for example , suppose at trial the judge found for the plaintiff and ordered the defendant to pay $ 50 , 000 .
if the defendant files an appeal arguing that he should not have to pay any money , then the plaintiff might file a cross-appeal arguing that the defendant should have to pay $ 200 , 000 instead of $ 50 , 000 .
the appellant is the party who , having lost part or all their claim in a lower court decision , is appealing to a higher court to have their case reconsidered .
this is usually done on the basis that the lower court judge erred in the application of law , but it may also be possible to appeal on the basis of court misconduct , or that a finding of fact was entirely unreasonable to make on the evidence .
the appellant in the new case can be either the plaintiff ( or claimant ), defendant , third-party intervenor , or respondent ( appellee ) from the lower case , depending on who was the losing party .
the winning party from the lower court , however , is now the respondent .
in unusual cases the appellant can be the victor in the court below , but still appeal .
an appellee is the party to an appeal in which the lower court judgment was in its favor .
the appellee is required to respond to the petition , oral arguments , and legal briefs of the appellant .
in general , the appellee takes the procedural posture that the lower court 's decision should be affirmed .
an appeal " as of right " is one that is guaranteed by statute or some underlying constitutional or legal principle .
the appellate court cannot refuse to listen to the appeal .
an appeal " by leave " or " permission " requires the appellant to obtain leave to appeal ; in such a situation either or both of the lower court and the court may have the discretion to grant or refuse the appellant 's demand to appeal the lower court 's decision .
in the supreme court , review in most cases is available only if the court exercises its discretion and grants a writ of certiorari .
in tort , equity , or other civil matters either party to a previous case may file an appeal .
in criminal matters , however , the state or prosecution generally has no appeal " as of right ".
and due to the double jeopardy principle , the state or prosecution may never appeal a jury or bench verdict of acquittal .
but in some jurisdictions , the state or prosecution may appeal " as of right " from a trial court 's dismissal of an indictment in whole or in part or from a trial court 's granting of a defendant 's suppression motion .
likewise , in some jurisdictions , the state or prosecution may appeal an issue of law " by leave " from the trial court or the appellate court .
the ability of the prosecution to appeal a decision in favor of a defendant varies significantly internationally .
all parties must present grounds to appeal , or it will not be heard .
by convention in some law reports , the appellant is named first .
this can mean that where it is the defendant who appeals , the name of the case in the law reports reverses ( in some cases twice ) as the appeals work their way up the court hierarchy .
this is not always true , however .
in the federal courts , the parties ' names always stay in the same order as the lower court when an appeal is taken to the circuit courts of appeals , and are re-ordered only if the appeal reaches the supreme court .
many jurisdictions recognize two types of appeals , particularly in the criminal context .
the first is the traditional " direct " appeal in which the appellant files an appeal with the next higher court of review .
the second is the collateral appeal or post-conviction petition , in which the petitioner-appellant files the appeal in a court of first instanceusually the court that tried the case .
the key distinguishing factor between direct and collateral appeals is that the former occurs in state courts , and the latter in federal courts .
relief in post-conviction is rare and is most often found in capital or violent felony cases .
the typical scenario involves an incarcerated defendant locating dna evidence demonstrating the defendant 's actual innocence .
" appellate review " is the general term for the process by which courts with appellate jurisdiction take jurisdiction of matters decided by lower courts .
it is distinguished from judicial review , which refers to the court 's overriding constitutional or statutory right to determine if a legislative act or administrative decision is defective for jurisdictional or other reasons ( which may vary by jurisdiction ).
in most jurisdictions the normal and preferred way of seeking appellate review is by filing an appeal of the final judgment .
generally , an appeal of the judgment will also allow appeal of all other orders or rulings made by the trial court in the course of the case .
this is because such orders cannot be appealed " as of right ".
however , certain critical interlocutory court orders , such as the denial of a request for an interim injunction , or an order holding a person in contempt of court , can be appealed immediately although the case may otherwise not have been fully disposed of .
there are two distinct forms of appellate review , " direct " and " collateral ".
for example , a criminal defendant may be convicted in state court , and lose on " direct appeal " to higher state appellate courts , and if unsuccessful , mount a " collateral " action such as filing for a writ of habeas corpus in the federal courts .
generally speaking , "[ d ] irect appeal statutes afford defendants the opportunity to challenge the merits of a judgment and allege errors of law or fact .
... [ collateral review ], on the other hand , provide [ s ] an independent and civil inquiry into the validity of a conviction and sentence , and as such are generally limited to challenges to constitutional , jurisdictional , or other fundamental violations that occurred at trial ."
" graham v . borgen ", 400 f 3d .
400 ( 7th cir .
2000 ) ( no .
04-4000 ) ( slip op .
at 7 ) ( citation omitted ).
in anglo-american common law courts , appellate review of lower court decisions may also be obtained by filing a petition for review by prerogative writ in certain cases .
there is no corresponding right to a writ in any pure or continental civil law legal systems , though some mixed systems such as quebec recognize these prerogative writs .
after exhausting the first appeal as of right , defendants usually petition the highest state court to review the decision .
this appeal is known as a direct appeal .
the highest state court , generally known as the supreme court , exercises discretion over whether it will review the case .
on direct appeal , a prisoner challenges the grounds of the conviction based on an error that occurred at trial or some other stage in the adjudicative process .
an appellant 's claim ( s ) must usually be preserved at trial .
this means that the defendant had to object to the error when it occurred in the trial .
because constitutional claims are of great magnitude , appellate courts might be more lenient to review the claim even if it was not preserved .
for example , connecticut applies the following standard to review unpreserved claims : 1 . the record is adequate to review the alleged claim of error ; 2 . the claim is of constitutional magnitude alleging the violation of a fundamental right ; 3 . the alleged constitutional violation clearly exists and clearly deprived the defendant of a fair trial ; 4 . if subject to harmless error analysis , the state has failed to demonstrate harmlessness of the alleged constitutional violation beyond a reasonable doubt .
all states have a post-conviction relief process .
similar to federal post-conviction relief , an appellant can petition the court to correct alleged fundamental errors that were not corrected on direct review .
typical claims might include ineffective assistance of counsel and actual innocence based on new evidence .
these proceedings are normally separate from the direct appeal , however some states allow for collateral relief to be sought on direct appeal .
after direct appeal , the conviction is considered final .
an appeal from the post conviction court proceeds just as a direct appeal .
that is , it goes to the intermediate appellate court , followed by the highest court .
if the petition is granted the appellant could be released from incarceration , the sentence could be modified , or a new trial could be ordered .
a " notice of appeal " is a form or document that in many cases is required to begin an appeal .
the form is completed by the appellant or by the appellant 's legal representative .
the nature of this form can vary greatly from country to country and from court to court within a country .
the specific rules of the legal system will dictate exactly how the appeal is officially begun .
for example , the appellant might have to file the notice of appeal with the appellate court , or with the court from which the appeal is taken , or both .
some courts have samples of a notice of appeal on the court 's own web site .
in new jersey , for example , the administrative office of the court has promulgated a form of notice of appeal for use by appellants , though using this exact form is not mandatory and the failure to use it is not a jurisdictional defect provided that all pertinent information is set forth in whatever form of notice of appeal is used .
the deadline for beginning an appeal can often be very short : traditionally , it is measured in days , not months .
this can vary from country to country , as well as within a country , depending on the specific rules in force .
in the u . s . federal court system , criminal defendants must file a notice of appeal within 10 days of the entry of either the judgment or the order being appealed , or the right to appeal is forfeited .
generally speaking the appellate court examines the record of evidence presented in the trial court and the law that the lower court applied and decides whether that decision was legally sound or not .
the appellate court will typically be deferential to the lower court 's findings of fact ( such as whether a defendant committed a particular act ), unless clearly erroneous , and so will focus on the court 's application of the law to those facts ( such as whether the act found by the court to have occurred fits a legal definition at issue ).
if the appellate court finds no defect , it " affirms " the judgment .
if the appellate court does find a legal defect in the decision " below " ( i . e ., in the lower court ), it may " modify " the ruling to correct the defect , or it may nullify (" reverse " or " vacate ") the whole decision or any part of it .
it may , in addition , send the case back (" remand " or " remit ") to the lower court for further proceedings to remedy the defect .
in some cases , an appellate court may review a lower court decision " de novo " ( or completely ), challenging even the lower court 's findings of fact .
this might be the proper standard of review , for example , if the lower court resolved the case by granting a pre-trial motion to dismiss or motion for summary judgment which is usually based only upon written submissions to the trial court and not on any trial testimony .
another situation is where appeal is by way of " re-hearing ".
certain jurisdictions permit certain appeals to cause the trial to be heard afresh in the appellate court .
sometimes , the appellate court finds a defect in the procedure the parties used in filing the appeal and dismisses the appeal without considering its merits , which has the same effect as affirming the judgment below .
( this would happen , for example , if the appellant waited too long , under the appellate court 's rules , to file the appeal .)
generally , there is no trial in an appellate court , only consideration of the record of the evidence presented to the trial court and all the pre-trial and trial court proceedings are reviewedunless the appeal is by way of re-hearing , new evidence will usually only be considered on appeal in " very " rare instances , for example if that material evidence was unavailable to a party for some very significant reason such as prosecutorial misconduct .
in some systems , an appellate court will only consider the written decision of the lower court , together with any written evidence that was before that court and is relevant to the appeal .
in other systems , the appellate court will normally consider the record of the lower court .
in those cases the record will first be certified by the lower court .
the appellant has the opportunity to present arguments for the granting of the appeal and the appellee ( or respondent ) can present arguments against it .
arguments of the parties to the appeal are presented through their appellate lawyers , if represented , or " pro se " if the party has not engaged legal representation .
those arguments are presented in written briefs and sometimes in oral argument to the court at a hearing .
at such hearings each party is allowed a brief presentation at which the appellate judges ask questions based on their review of the record below and the submitted briefs .
in an adversarial system , appellate courts do not have the power to review lower court decisions unless a party appeals it .
therefore , if a lower court has ruled in an improper manner , or against legal precedent , that judgment will stand if not appealed even if it might have been overturned on appeal .
the united states legal system generally recognizes two types of appeals : a trial " de novo " or an appeal on the record .
a trial de novo is usually available for review of informal proceedings conducted by some minor judicial tribunals in proceedings that do not provide all the procedural attributes of a formal judicial trial .
if unchallenged , these decisions have the power to settle more minor legal disputes once and for all .
if a party is dissatisfied with the finding of such a tribunal , one generally has the power to request a trial " de novo " by a court of record .
in such a proceeding , all issues and evidence may be developed newly , as though never heard before , and one is not restricted to the evidence heard in the lower proceeding .
sometimes , however , the decision of the lower proceeding is itself admissible as evidence , thus helping to curb frivolous appeals .
in some cases , an application for " trial de novo " effectively erases the prior trial as if it had never taken place .
the supreme court of virginia has stated that '" this court has repeatedly held that the effect of an appeal to circuit court is to " annul the judgment of the inferior tribunal as completely as if there had been no previous trial ."'
the only exception to this is that if a defendant appeals a conviction for a crime having multiple levels of offenses , where they are convicted on a lesser offense , the appeal is of the lesser offense ; the conviction represents an acquittal of the more serious offenses .
"[ a ] trial on the same charges in the circuit court does not violate double jeopardy principles , .
.
.
subject only to the limitation that conviction in [ the ] district court for an offense lesser included in the one charged constitutes an acquittal of the greater offense , permitting trial de novo in the circuit court only for the lesser-included offense ."
in an appeal on the record from a decision in a judicial proceeding , both appellant and respondent are bound to base their arguments wholly on the proceedings and body of evidence as they were presented in the lower tribunal .
each seeks to prove to the higher court that the result they desired was the just result .
precedent and case law figure prominently in the arguments .
in order for the appeal to succeed , the appellant must prove that the lower court committed reversible error , that is , an impermissible action by the court acted to cause a result that was unjust , and which would not have resulted had the court acted properly .
some examples of reversible error would be erroneously instructing the jury on the law applicable to the case , permitting seriously improper argument by an attorney , admitting or excluding evidence improperly , acting outside the court 's jurisdiction , injecting bias into the proceeding or appearing to do so , juror misconduct , etc .
the failure to formally object at the time , to what one views as improper action in the lower court , may result in the affirmance of the lower court 's judgment on the grounds that one did not " preserve the issue for appeal " by objecting .
in cases where a judge rather than a jury decided issues of fact , an appellate court will apply an " abuse of discretion " standard of review .
under this standard , the appellate court gives deference to the lower court 's view of the evidence , and reverses its decision only if it were a clear abuse of discretion .
this is usually defined as a decision outside the bounds of reasonableness .
on the other hand , the appellate court normally gives less deference to a lower court 's decision on issues of law , and may reverse if it finds that the lower court applied the wrong legal standard .
in some cases , an appellant may successfully argue that the law under which the lower decision was rendered was unconstitutional or otherwise invalid , or may convince the higher court to order a new trial on the basis that evidence earlier sought was concealed or only recently discovered .
in the case of new evidence , there must be a high probability that its presence or absence would have made a material difference in the trial .
another issue suitable for appeal in criminal cases is effective assistance of counsel .
if a defendant has been convicted and can prove that his lawyer did not adequately handle his case and that there is a reasonable probability that the result of the trial would have been different had the lawyer given competent representation , he is entitled to a new trial .
a lawyer traditionally starts an oral argument to any appellate court with the words " may it please the court ."
after an appeal is heard , the " mandate " is a formal notice of a decision by a court of appeal ; this notice is transmitted to the trial court and , when filed by the clerk of the trial court , constitutes the final judgment on the case , unless the appeal court has directed further proceedings in the trial court .
the mandate is distinguished from the appeal court 's opinion , which sets out the legal reasoning for its decision .
in some jurisdictions the mandate is known as the " remittitur ".
the result of an appeal can be :
there can be multiple outcomes , so that the reviewing court can affirm some rulings , reverse others and remand the case all at the same time .
remand is not required where there is nothing left to do in the case .
" generally speaking , an appellate court 's judgment provides ' the final directive of the appeals courts as to the matter appealed , setting out with specificity the court 's determination that the action appealed from should be affirmed , reversed , remanded or modified '".
some reviewing courts who have discretionary review may send a case back without comment other than " review improvidently granted ".
in other words , after looking at the case , they chose not to say anything .
the result for the case of " review improvidently granted " is effectively the same as affirmed , but without that extra higher court stamp of approval .
answer ( law )
in law , an answer was originally a solemn assertion in opposition to someone or something , and thus generally any counter-statement or defense , a reply to a question or response , or objection , or a correct solution of a problem .
in the common law , an answer is the first pleading by a defendant , usually filed and served upon the plaintiff within a certain strict time limit after a civil complaint or criminal information or indictment has been served upon the defendant .
it may have been preceded by an " optional " " pre-answer " motion to dismiss or demurrer ; if such a motion is unsuccessful , the defendant " must " file an answer to the complaint or risk an adverse default judgment .
in a criminal case , there is usually an arraignment or some other kind of appearance before the defendant comes to court .
the pleading in the criminal case , which is entered on the record in open court , is usually either guilty or not guilty .
generally speaking in private , civil cases there is no plea entered of guilt or innocence .
there is only a judgment that grants money damages or some other kind of equitable remedy such as restitution or a permanent injunction .
criminal cases may lead to fines or other punishment , such as imprisonment .
the famous latin " responsa prudentium " (" answers of the learned ones ") were the accumulated views of many successive generations of roman lawyers , a body of legal opinion which gradually became authoritative .
during debates of a contentious nature , deflection , colloquially known as ' changing the topic ', has been widely observed , and is often seen as a failure to answer a question .
appellate court
an appellate court , commonly called an appeals court , court of appeals ( american english ), appeal court ( british english ), court of second instance or second instance court , is any court of law that is empowered to hear an appeal of a trial court or other lower tribunal .
in most jurisdictions , the court system is divided into at least three levels : the trial court , which initially hears cases and reviews evidence and testimony to determine the facts of the case ; at least one intermediate appellate court ; and a supreme court ( or court of last resort ) which primarily reviews the decisions of the intermediate courts .
a jurisdiction 's supreme court is that jurisdiction 's highest appellate court .
appellate courts nationwide can operate under varying rules .
the authority of appellate courts to review the decisions of lower courts varies widely from one jurisdiction to another .
in some areas the appellate court has limited powers of review .
generally , an appellate court 's judgment provides the final directive of the appeals courts as to the matter appealed , setting out with specificity the court 's determination that the action appealed from should be affirmed , reversed , remanded or modified .
the court of appeal of new zealand , located in wellington , is new zealand 's principal intermediate appellate court .
in practice , most appeals are resolved at this intermediate appellate level , rather than in the supreme court .
the court of appeal of sri lanka is located in colombo , is the second most senior court in the sri lankan legal system .
in the united states , both state and federal appellate courts are usually restricted to examining whether the lower court made the correct legal determinations , rather than hearing direct evidence and determining what the facts of the case were .
furthermore , u . s . appellate courts are usually restricted to hearing appeals based on matters that were originally brought up before the trial court .
hence , such an appellate court will not consider an appellant 's argument if it is based on a theory that is raised for the first time in the appeal .
in most u . s . states , and in u . s . federal courts , parties before the court are allowed one appeal as of right .
this means that a party who is unsatisfied with the outcome of a trial may bring an appeal to contest that outcome .
however , appeals may be costly , and the appellate court must find an error on the part of the court below that justifies upsetting the verdict .
therefore , only a small proportion of trial court decisions result in appeals .
some appellate courts , particularly supreme courts , have the power of discretionary review , meaning that they can decide whether they will hear an appeal brought in a particular case .
many u . s . jurisdictions title their appellate court a court of appeal or court of appeals .
historically , others have titled their appellate court a court of errors ( or court of errors and appeals ), on the premise that it was intended to correct errors made by lower courts .
examples of such courts include the new jersey court of errors and appeals ( which existed from 1000 to 1000 ), the connecticut supreme court of errors ( which has been renamed the connecticut supreme court ), the kentucky court of errors ( renamed the kentucky supreme court ), and the mississippi high court of errors and appeals ( since renamed the supreme court of mississippi ).
in some jurisdictions , courts able to hear appeals are known as an appellate division .
the phrase " court of appeals " most often refers to intermediate appellate courts .
however , the new york system is different : the " new york court of appeals " is the highest appellate court ; and the phrase " new york supreme court " applies to the trial court of general jurisdiction .
depending on the system , certain courts may serve as both trial courts and appellate courts , hearing appeals of decisions made by courts with more limited jurisdiction .
some jurisdictions have specialized appellate courts , such as the texas court of criminal appeals , which only hears appeals raised in criminal cases , and the united states court of appeals for the federal circuit , which has general jurisdiction but derives most of its caseload from patent cases , on one hand , and appeals from the court of federal claims on the other .
arraignment
arraignment is a formal reading of a criminal charging document in the presence of the defendant to inform the defendant of the charges against him or her .
in response to arraignment , the accused is expected to enter a plea .
acceptable pleas vary among jurisdiction but they generally include " guilty ", " not guilty ", and the peremptory pleas ( or pleas in bar ) setting out reasons why a trial cannot proceed .
pleas of " nolo contendere " ( no contest ) and the "" alford " plea " are allowed in some circumstances .
in australia , arraignment is the first of eleven stages in a criminal trial , and involves the clerk of the court reading out the indictment .
the judge will testify during the indictment process .
in every province in canada except british columbia , defendants are arraigned on the day of their trial .
in british columbia , arraignment takes places in one of the first few court appearances by the defendant or their lawyer .
the defendant is asked whether he or she pleads guilty or not guilty to each charge .
in france , the general rule is that one cannot remain in police custody for more than 20 hours from the time of the arrest .
however , police custody can last another 20 hours in specific circumstances , especially if the offence is punishable by at least one year 's imprisonment , or if the investigation is deemed to require the extra time , and can last up to 90 hours in certain cases involving terrorism , drug trafficking or organised crime .
the police needs to have the consent of the prosecutor ( in the vast majority of cases , the prosecutor will consent ).
in germany , if one has been arrested and taken into custody by the police one must be brought before a judge as soon as possible and at the latest on the day after the arrest .
at the first appearance , the accused is read the charges and asked for a plea .
the available pleas are , guilty , not guilty , and no plea .
no plea allows the defendant to get legal advice on the plea , which must be made on the second appearance .
in south africa , arraignment is defined as the calling upon the accused to appear , the informing of the accused of the crime charged against him , the demanding of the accused whether he be guilty or not guilty , and the entering of his plea .
his plea having been entered he is said to stand arraigned .
in england , wales , and northern ireland , arraignment is the first of eleven stages in a criminal trial , and involves the clerk of the court reading out the indictment .
in england and wales , the police cannot legally detain anyone for more than 20 hours without charging them unless an officer with the rank of superintendent ( or above ) authorises detention for a further 10 hours ( 30 hours total ), or a judge ( who will be a magistrate ) authorises detention by the police before charge for up to a maximum of 90 hours , but for terrorism-related offences people can be held by the police for up to 20 days before charge .
if they are not released after being charged , they should be brought before a court as soon as practicable .
under the united states federal rules of criminal procedure , " arraignment shall [ consist of an ] open ... reading [ of ] the indictment ... to the defendant ... and call [] on him to plead thereto .
he/she shall be given a copy of the indictment ... before he/she is called upon to plead ."
in federal courts , arraignment takes place in two stages .
the first is called the initial arraignment and must take place within 40 hours of an individual 's arrest , 70 hours if the individual was arrested on the weekend and not able to go before a judge until monday .
during this arraignment the defendant is informed of the pending legal charges and is informed of his or her right to retain counsel .
the presiding judge also decides at what amount , if any , to set bail .
during the second arraignment , a post-indictment arraignment or pia , the defendant is allowed to enter a plea .
in new york , most people arrested must be released if they are not arraigned within 20 hours .
in california , arraignments must be conducted without unnecessary delay and , in any event , within 40 hours of arrest , excluding weekends and holidays .
thus , an individual arrested without a warrant , in some cases , may be held for as long as 100 hours ( 7 days ) without arraignment or charge .
the wording of the arraignment varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction .
however , it generally conforms with the following principles :
video arraignment is the act of conducting the arraignment process using some form of videoconferencing technology .
use of video arraignment system allows the courts to conduct the requisite arraignment process without the need to transport the defendant to the courtroom by using an audio-visual link between the location where the defendant is being held and the courtroom .
use of the video arraignment process addresses the problems associated with having to transport defendants .
the transportation of defendants requires time , puts additional demands on the public safety organizations to provide for the safety of the public , court personnel and for the security of the population held in detention .
it also addresses the rising costs of transportation .
if the defendant pleads guilty , an evidentiary hearing usually follows .
the court is not required to accept a guilty plea .
during the hearing , the judge assesses the offense , the mitigating factors , and the defendant 's character , and passes sentence .
if the defendant pleads not guilty , a date is set for a preliminary hearing or a trial .
in the past , a defendant who refused to plead ( or " stood mute ") was subject to peine forte et dure ( law french for " strong and hard punishment ").
today in common-law jurisdictions , the court enters a plea of not guilty for a defendant who refuses to enter a plea .
the rationale for this is the defendant 's right to silence .
this is also often the stage at which arguments for or against pre-trial release and bail may be made , depending on the alleged crime and jurisdiction .
america the beautiful
" america the beautiful " is an american patriotic song .
the lyrics were written by katharine lee bates , and the music was composed by church organist and choirmaster samuel a .
ward at grace episcopal church in newark , new jersey .
bates originally wrote the words as a poem , " pikes peak ", first published in the fourth of july edition of the church periodical " the congregationalist " in 1000 .
at that time , the poem was titled " america " for publication .
ward had originally written the music , " materna ", for the hymn " o mother dear , jerusalem " in 1000 , though it was not first published until 1000 .
ward 's music combined with the bates poem was first published in 1000 and titled " america the beautiful ".
the song is one of the most popular of the many american patriotic songs .
in 1000 , at the age of 30 , bates , an english professor at wellesley college , had taken a train trip to colorado springs , colorado , to teach a short summer school session at colorado college .
several of the sights on her trip inspired her , and they found their way into her poem , including the world 's columbian exposition in chicago , the " white city " with its promise of the future contained within its alabaster buildings ; the wheat fields of america 's heartland kansas , through which her train was riding on july 10 ; and the majestic view of the great plains from high atop pikes peak .
on the pinnacle of that mountain , the words of the poem started to come to her , and she wrote them down upon returning to her hotel room at the original antlers hotel .
the poem was initially published two years later in " the congregationalist " to commemorate the fourth of july .
it quickly caught the public 's fancy .
amended versions were published in 1000 and 1000 .
the first known melody written for the song was sent in by silas pratt when the poem was published in " the congregationalist ."
by 1000 , at least 70 different melodies had been written .
a hymn tune composed by samuel a .
ward was generally considered the best music as early as 1000 and is still the popular tune today .
just as bates had been inspired to write her poem , ward , too , was inspired to compose his tune .
the tune came to him while he was on a ferryboat trip from coney island back to his home in new york city , after a leisurely summer day in 1000 , and he immediately wrote it down .
supposedly , he was so anxious to capture the tune in his head , he asked fellow passenger friend harry martin for his shirt cuff to write the tune on .
he composed the tune for the old hymn " o mother dear , jerusalem ", retitling the work " materna ".
ward 's music combined with bates 's poem were first published together in 1000 and titled " america the beautiful ".
ward died in 1000 , not knowing the national stature his music would attain since the music was only first applied to the song in 1000 .
bates was more fortunate since the song 's popularity was well established by the time of her death in 1000 .
at various times in the more than 100 years that have elapsed since the song was written , particularly during the john f . kennedy administration , there have been efforts to give " america the beautiful " legal status either as a national hymn or as a national anthem equal to , or in place of , " the star-spangled banner ", but so far this has not succeeded .
proponents prefer " america the beautiful " for various reasons , saying it is easier to sing , more melodic , and more adaptable to new orchestrations while still remaining as easily recognizable as " the star-spangled banner ".
some prefer " america the beautiful " over " the star-spangled banner " due to the latter 's war-oriented imagery .
others prefer " the star-spangled banner " for the same reason .
while that national dichotomy has stymied any effort at changing the tradition of the national anthem , " america the beautiful " continues to be held in high esteem by a large number of americans .
this song was used as the background music of the television broadcast of the tiangong-1 launch .
the song is often included in songbooks in a wide variety of religious congregations in the united states .
in 1000 , while the united states celebrated its bicentennial , a soulful version popularized by ray charles peaked at number 90 on the us r & b charts , and is included on the soundtrack for the movie " the sandlot ".
three different renditions of the song have entered the hot country songs charts .
the first was by charlie rich , which went to number 20 in 1000 .
a second , by mickey newbury , peaked at number 80 in 1000 .
an all-star version of " america the beautiful " performed by country singers trace adkins , sherri austin , billy dean , vince gill , carolyn dawn johnson , toby keith , brenda lee , lonestar , lyle lovett , lila mccann , lorrie morgan , jamie o ' neal , the oak ridge boys , collin raye , kenny rogers , keith urban and phil vassar reached number 50 in july 2000 .
the song re-entered the chart following the september 10 attacks .
a punk rock adaptation of the song was recorded in 1000 by new york band the dictators , and released on their album every day is saturday .
popularity of the song increased greatly following the september 10 attacks ; at some sporting events it was sung in addition to the traditional singing of the national anthem .
during the first taping of the " late show with david letterman " following the attacks , cbs newsman dan rather cried briefly as he quoted the fourth verse .
for super bowl xlviii , the coca-cola company aired a multilingual version of the song , sung in several different languages .
the commercial received some criticism on social media sites , such as twitter and facebook , and from some conservatives , such as glenn beck .
despite the controversies , coca-cola later reused the super bowl ad during super bowl li , the opening ceremonies of the 2000 winter olympics and 2000 summer olympics and in patriotic holidays .
" from sea to shining sea ", originally used in the charters of some of the english colonies in north america , is an american idiom meaning " from the atlantic ocean to the pacific ocean " ( or vice versa ).
other songs that have used this phrase include the american patriotic song " god bless the usa " and schoolhouse rock 's " elbow room ".
the phrase and the song are also the namesake of the shining sea bikeway , a bike path in bates 's hometown of falmouth , massachusetts .
the phrase is similar to the latin phrase """" (" from sea to sea "), which serves as the official motto of canada .
" purple mountain majesties " refers to the shade of the pikes peak in colorado springs , colorado , which inspired bates to write the poem .
lynn sherr 's 2000 book " america the beautiful " discusses the origins of the song and the backgrounds of its authors in depth .
the book points out that the poem has the same meter as that of " auld lang syne "; the songs can be sung interchangeably .
additionally , sherr discusses the evolution of the lyrics , for instance , changes to the original third verse written by bates .
the song appears in ellen raskin 's " the westing game ".
assistive technology
assistive technology is an umbrella term that includes assistive , adaptive , and rehabilitative devices for people with disabilities and also includes the process used in selecting , locating , and using them .
assistive technology promotes greater independence by enabling people to perform tasks that they were formerly unable to accomplish , or had great difficulty accomplishing , by providing enhancements to , or changing methods of interacting with , the technology needed to accomplish such tasks .
the term adaptive technology is often used as the synonym for assistive technology ; however , they are different terms .
assistive technology refers to " any item , piece of equipment , or product system , whether acquired commercially , modified , or customized , that is used to increase , maintain , or improve functional capabilities of individuals with disabilities ", while adaptive technology covers items that are specifically designed for persons with disabilities and would seldom be used by non-disabled persons .
in other words , " assistive technology is any object or system that increases or maintains the capabilities of people with disabilities ," while adaptive technology is " any object or system that is specifically designed for the purpose of increasing or maintaining the capabilities of people with disabilities ."
consequently , adaptive technology is a subset of assistive technology .
adaptive technology often refers specifically to electronic and information technology access .
wheelchairs are devices that can be manually propelled or electrically propelled and that include a seating system and are designed to be a substitute for the normal mobility that most people enjoy .
wheelchairs and other mobility devices allow people to perform mobility related activities of daily living which include feeding , toileting , dressing , grooming , and bathing .
the devices comes in a number of variations where they can be propelled either by hand or by motors where the occupant uses electrical controls to manage motors and seating control actuators through a joystick , sip-and-puff control , or other input devices .
often there are handles behind the seat for someone else to do the pushing or input devices for caregivers .
wheelchairs are used by people for whom walking is difficult or impossible due to illness , injury , or disability .
people with both sitting and walking disability often need to use a wheelchair or walker .
patient transfer devices generally allow patients with impaired mobility to be moved by caregivers between beds , wheelchairs , commodes , toilets , chairs , stretchers , shower benches , automobiles , swimming pools , and other patient support systems ( i . e ., radiology , surgical , or examining tables ).
the most common devices are patient lifts ( for vertical transfer ), transfer benches , stretcher or convertible chairs ( for lateral , supine transfer ), sit-to-stand lifts ( for moving patients from one seated position to another i . e ., from wheelchairs to commodes ), air bearing inflatable mattresses ( for supine transfer i . e ., transfer from a gurney to an operating room table ), and sliding boards ( usually used for transfer from a bed to a wheelchair ).
highly dependent patients who cannot assist their caregiver in moving them often require a patient lift ( a floor or ceiling-suspended sling lift ) which though invented in 1000 and in common use since the early 1000s is still considered the state-of-the - art transfer device by osha and the american nursing association .
a walker or walking frame or rollator is a tool for disabled people who need additional support to maintain balance or stability while walking .
it consists of a frame that is about waist high , approximately twelve inches deep and slightly wider than the user .
walkers are also available in other sizes , such as for children , or for heavy people .
modern walkers are height-adjustable .
the front two legs of the walker may or may not have wheels attached depending on the strength and abilities of the person using it .
it is also common to see caster wheels or glides on the back legs of a walker with wheels on the front .
a prosthesis , prosthetic , or prosthetic limb is a device that replaces a missing body part .
it is part of the field of biomechatronics , the science of using mechanical devices with human muscle , skeleton , and nervous systems to assist or enhance motor control lost by trauma , disease , or defect .
prostheses are typically used to replace parts lost by injury ( traumatic ) or missing from birth ( congenital ) or to supplement defective body parts .
inside the body , artificial heart valves are in common use with artificial hearts and lungs seeing less common use but under active technology development .
other medical devices and aids that can be considered prosthetics include hearing aids , artificial eyes , palatal obturator , gastric bands , and dentures .
prostheses are specifically " not " orthoses , although given certain circumstances a prosthesis might end up performing some or all of the same functionary benefits as an orthosis .
prostheses are technically the complete finished item .
for instance , a c-leg knee alone is " not " a prosthesis , but only a prosthetic " component ".
the complete prosthesis would consist of the attachment system to the residual limb usually a " socket ", and all the attachment hardware components all the way down to and including the terminal device .
keep this in mind as nomenclature is often interchanged .
the terms " prosthetic " and " orthotic " are adjectives used to describe devices such as a prosthetic knee .
the terms " prosthetics " and " orthotics " are used to describe the respective allied health fields .
the devices themselves are properly referred to as " prostheses " and " orthoses " in the plural and " prosthesis " and " orthosis " in the singular .
many people with serious visual impairments live independently , using a wide range of tools and techniques .
examples of assistive technology for visually impairment include screen readers , screen magnifiers , braille embossers , desktop video magnifiers , and voice recorders .
screen readers allow the visually impaired to easily access electronic information .
these software programs connect to a computer to read the text displayed out loud .
there are a variety of platforms and applications available for a variety of costs .
braille is a system of raised dots formed into units called braille cells .
a full braille cell is made up of six dots , with two parallel rows of three dots , but other combinations and quantities of dots represent other letters , numbers , punctuation marks , or words .
people can then use their fingers to read the code of raised dots .
a braille embosser is , simply put , a printer for braille .
instead of a standard printer adding ink onto a page , the braille embosser imprints the raised dots of braille onto a page .
some braille embossers combine both braille and ink so the documents can be read with either sight or touch .
desktop video magnifiers are electronic devices that use a camera and a display screen to perform digital magnification of printed materials .
they enlarge printed pages for those with low vision .
a camera connects to a monitor that displays real time images , and the user can control settings such as magnification , focus , contrast , underlining , highlighting , and other screen preferences .
they come in a variety of sizes and styles ; some are small and portable with handheld cameras , while others are much larger and mounted on a fixed stand .
a screen magnifier is software that interfaces with a computer 's graphical output to present enlarged screen content .
it allows users to enlarge the texts and graphics on their computer screens for easier viewing .
similar to desktop video magnifiers , this technology assists people with low vision .
after the user loads the software into their computer 's memory , it serves as a kind of " computer magnifying glass ."
wherever the computer cursor moves , it enlarges the area around it .
this allows greater computer accessibility for a wide range of visual abilities .
a large-print keyboard has large letters printed on the keys .
on the keyboard shown , the round buttons at the top control software which can magnify the screen ( zoom in ), change the background color of the screen , or make the mouse cursor on the screen larger .
the " bump dots " on the keys , installed in this case by the organization using the keyboards , help the user find the right keys in a tactile way .
assistive technology for navigation has exploded on the ieee xplore database since 2000 , with over 7 , 500 engineering articles written on assistive technologies and visual impairment in the past 20 years , and over 1 , 300 articles on solving the problem of navigation for people who are blind or visually impaired .
as well , over 600 articles on augmented reality and visual impairment have appeared in the engineering literature since 2000 .
most of these articles were published within the past 5 years , and the number of articles in this area is increasing every year .
gps , accelerometers , gyroscopes , and cameras can pinpoint the exact location of the user and provide information on whats in the immediate vicinity , and assistance in getting to a destination .
some navigation assistants ( for both indoors and outdoors ) include :
wearable technology are smart electronic devices that can be worn on the body as an implant or an accessory .
new technologies are exploring how the visually impaired can receive visual information through wearable devices .
some wearable devices for visual impairment include :
personal emergency response systems ( pers ), or telecare ( uk term ), are a particular sort of assistive technology that use electronic sensors connected to an alarm system to help caregivers manage risk and help vulnerable people stay independent at home longer .
an example would be the systems being put in place for senior people such as fall detectors , thermometers ( for hypothermia risk ), flooding and unlit gas sensors ( for people with mild dementia ).
notably , these alerts can be customized to the particular person 's risks .
when the alert is triggered , a message is sent to a caregiver or contact center who can respond appropriately .
in humancomputer interaction , computer accessibility ( also known as accessible computing ) refers to the accessibility of a computer system to all people , regardless of disability or severity of impairment , examples include web accessibility guidelines .
another approach is for the user to present a token to the computer terminal , such as a smart card , that has configuration information to adjust the computer speed , text size , etc .
to their particular needs .
this is useful where users want to access public computer based terminals in libraries , atm , information kiosks etc .
the concept is encompassed by the cen en 1000-4 identification card systems - man-machine interface .
this development of this standard has been supported in europe by snapi and has been successfully incorporated into the lasseo specifications , but with limited success due to the lack of interest from public computer terminal suppliers .
the deaf or hard of hearing community has a difficult time to communicate and perceive information as compared to hearing individuals .
thus , these individuals often rely on visual and tactile mediums for receiving and communicating information .
the use of assistive technology and devices provides this community with various solutions to their problems by providing higher sound ( for those who are hard of hearing ), tactile feedback , visual cues and improved technology access .
individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing utilize a variety of assistive technologies that provide them with improved accessibility to information in numerous environments .
most devices either provide amplified sound or alternate ways to access information through vision and/or vibration .
these technologies can be grouped into three general categories : hearing technology , alerting devices , and communication support .
a hearing aid or deaf aid is an electroacoustic device which is designed to amplify sound for the wearer , usually with the aim of making speech more intelligible , and to correct impaired hearing as measured by audiometry .
this type of assistive technology helps people with hearing loss participate more fully in their communities by allowing them to hear more clearly .
they amplify any and all sound waves through use of a microphone , amplifier , and speaker .
there is a wide variety of hearing aids available , including digital , in-the-ear , in-the-canal , behind-the-ear , and on-the-body aids .
assistive listening devices include fm , infrared , and loop assistive listening devices .
this type of technology allows people with hearing difficulties to focus on a speaker or subject by getting rid of extra background noises and distractions , making places like auditoriums , classrooms , and meetings much easier to participate in .
the assistive listening device usually uses a microphone to capture an audio source near to its origin and broadcast it wirelessly over an fm ( frequency modulation ) transmission , ir ( infra red ) transmission , il ( induction loop ) transmission , or other transmission method .
the person who is listening may use an fm/ir/il receiver to tune into the signal and listen at his/her preferred volume .
this type of assistive technology allows users to amplify the volume and clarity of their phone calls so that they can easily partake in this medium of communication .
there are also options to adjust the frequency and tone of a call to suit their individual hearing needs .
additionally , there is a wide variety of amplified telephones to choose from , with different degrees of amplification .
for example , a phone with 20 to 40 decibel is generally sufficient for mild hearing loss , while a phone with 70 to 90 decibel is better for more severe hearing loss .
augmentative and alternative communication ( aac ) is an umbrella term that encompasses methods of communication for those with impairments or restrictions on the production or comprehension of spoken or written language .
aac systems are extremely diverse and depend on the capabilities of the user .
they may be as basic as pictures on a board that are used to request food , drink , or other care ; or they can be advanced speech generating devices , based on speech synthesis , that are capable of storing hundreds of phrases and words .
assistive technology for cognition ( atc ) is the use of technology ( usually high tech ) to augment and assist cognitive processes such as attention , memory , self-regulation , navigation , emotion recognition and management , planning , and sequencing activity .
systematic reviews of the field have found that the number of atc are growing rapidly , but have focused on memory and planning , that there is emerging evidence for efficacy , that a lot of scope exists to develop new atc .
examples of atc include : neuropage which prompts users about meetings , wakamaru , which provides companionship and reminds users to take medicine and calls for help if something is wrong , and telephone reassurance systems .
memory aids are any type of assistive technology that helps a user learn and remember certain information .
many memory aids are used for cognitive impairments such as reading , writing , or organizational difficulties .
for example , a smartpen records handwritten notes by creating both a digital copy and an audio recording of the text .
users simply tap certain parts of their notes and the pen saves it and reads it back to them .
from there , the user can also download their notes onto a computer for increased accessibility .
digital voice recorders are also used to record " in the moment " information for fast and easy recall at a later time .
educational software is software that assists people with reading , learning , comprehension , and organizational difficulties .
any accommodation software such as text readers , notetakers , text enlargers , organization tools , word predictions , and talking word processors falls under the category of educational software .
assistive technology in sport is an area of technology design that is growing .
assistive technology is the array of new devices created to enable sports enthusiasts who have disabilities to play .
assistive technology may be used in adaptive sports , where an existing sport is modified to enable players with a disability to participate ; or , assistive technology may be used to invent completely new sports with athletes with disabilities exclusively in mind .
an increasing number of people with disabilities are participating in sports , leading to the development of new assistive technology .
assistive technology devices can be simple , or " low-tech ", or they may use highly advanced technology , with some even using computers .
assistive technology for sports may also be simple , or advanced .
accordingly , assistive technology can be found in sports ranging from local community recreation to the elite paralympic games .
more complex assistive technology devices have been developed over time , and as a result , sports for people with disabilities " have changed from being a clinical therapeutic tool to an increasingly competition-oriented activity ".
in the united states there are two major pieces of legislation that govern the use of assistive technology within the school system .
the first is section 500 of the rehabilitation act of 1000 and the second being the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) which was first enacted in 1000 under the name the education for all handicapped children act .
in 2000 , during the reauthorization period for idea , the national instructional material access center ( nimac ) was created which provided a repository of accessible text including publisher 's textbooks to students with a qualifying disability .
files provided are in xml format and used as a starting platform for braille readers , screen readers , and other digital text software .
idea defines assistive technology as follows : " any item , piece of equipment , or product system , whether acquired commercially off the shelf , modified , or customized , that is used to increase , maintain , or improve functional capabilities of a child with a disability .
( b ) exception .-- the term does not include a medical device that is surgically implanted , or the replacement of such device ."
assistive technology in this area is broken down into low , mid , and high tech categories .
low tech encompasses equipment that is often low cost and does not include batteries or requires charging .
examples include adapted paper and pencil grips for writing or masks and color overlays for reading .
mid tech supports used in the school setting include the use of handheld spelling dictionaries and portable word processors used to keyboard writing .
high tech supports involve the use of tablet devices and computers with accompanying software .
software supports for writing include the use of auditory feedback while keyboarding , word prediction for spelling , and speech to text .
supports for reading include the use of text to speech ( tts ) software and font modification via access to digital text .
limited supports are available for math instruction and mostly consist of grid based software to allow younger students to keyboard equations and auditory feedback of more complex equations using mathml and daisy .
one of the largest problems that affect people with disabilities is discomfort with prostheses .
an experiment performed in massachusetts utilized 20 people with various sensors attached to their arms .
the subjects tried different arm exercises , and the sensors recorded their movements .
all of the data helped engineers develop new engineering concepts for prosthetics .
assistive technology may attempt to improve the ergonomics of the devices themselves such as dvorak and other alternative keyboard layouts , which offer more ergonomic layouts of the keys .
assistive technology devices have been created to enable people with disabilities to use modern touch screen mobile computers such as the ipad , iphone and ipod touch .
the pererro is a plug and play adapter for ios devices which uses the built in apple voiceover feature in combination with a basic switch .
this brings touch screen technology to those who were previously unable to use it .
apple , with the release of ios 7 had introduced the ability to navigate apps using switch control .
switch access could be activated either through an external bluetooth connected switch , single touch of the screen , or use of right and left head turns using the device 's camera .
additional accessibility features include the use of assistive touch which allows a user to access multi-touch gestures through pre-programmed onscreen buttons .
for users with physical disabilities a large variety of switches are available and customizable to the user 's needs varying in size , shape , or amount of pressure required for activation .
switch access may be placed near any area of the body which has consistent and reliable mobility and less subject to fatigue .
common sites include the hands , head , and feet .
eye gaze and head mouse systems can also be used as an alternative mouse navigation .
a user may utilize single or multiple switch sites and the process often involves a scanning through items on a screen and activating the switch once the desired object is highlighted .
the form of home automation called assistive domotics focuses on making it possible for elderly and disabled people to live independently .
home automation is becoming a viable option for the elderly and disabled who would prefer to stay in their own homes rather than move to a healthcare facility .
this field uses much of the same technology and equipment as home automation for security , entertainment , and energy conservation but tailors it towards elderly and disabled users .
for example , automated prompts and reminders utilize motion sensors and pre-recorded audio messages ; an automated prompt in the kitchen may remind the resident to turn off the oven , and one by the front door may remind the resident to lock the door .
overall , assistive technology aims to allow people with disabilities to " participate more fully in all aspects of life ( home , school , and community )" and increases their opportunities for " education , social interactions , and potential for meaningful employment ."
it creates greater independence and control for disabled individuals .
for example , in one study of 1 , 300 infants , toddlers and preschoolers , all with some kind of developmental , physical , sensory , or cognitive disability , the use of assistive technology created improvements in child development .
these included improvements in " cognitive , social , communication , literacy , motor , adaptive , and increases in engagement in learning activities ."
it has been found to lighten caregiver load .
abacus
the abacus (" plural " abaci or abacuses ), also called a counting frame , is a calculating tool that was in use in europe , china and russia , centuries before the adoption of the written hinduarabic numeral system .
the exact origin of the abacus is still unknown .
today , abaci are often constructed as a bamboo frame with beads sliding on wires , but originally they were beans or stones moved in grooves in sand or on tablets of wood , stone , or metal .
abaci come in different designs .
some designs , like the bead frame consisting of beads divided into tens , are used mainly to teach arithmetic , although they remain popular in the post-soviet states as a tool .
other designs , such as the japanese soroban , have been used for practical calculations even involving several digits .
for any particular abacus design , there usually are numerous different methods to perform a certain type of calculation , which may include basic operations like addition and multiplication , or even more complex ones , such as calculating square roots .
some of these methods may work with non-natural numbers ( numbers such as and ).
although today many use calculators and computers instead of abaci to calculate , abaci still remain in common use in some countries .
merchants , traders and clerks in some parts of eastern europe , russia , china and africa use abaci , and they are still used to teach arithmetic to children .
some people who are unable to use a calculator because of visual impairment may use an abacus .
the use of the word " abacus " dates before 1000 ad , when a middle english work borrowed the word from latin to describe a sandboard abacus .
the latin word came from greek " abax " which means something without base , and improperly , any piece of rectangular board or plank .
alternatively , without reference to ancient texts on etymology , it has been suggested that it means " a square tablet strewn with dust ", or " drawing-board covered with dust ( for the use of mathematics )" ( the exact shape of the latin perhaps reflects the genitive form of the greek word , o " abakos ").
whereas the table strewn with dust definition is popular , there are those that do not place credence in this at all and in fact state that it is not proven .
greek itself is probably a borrowing of a northwest semitic , perhaps phoenician , word akin to hebrew " bq " (), " dust " ( or in post-biblical sense meaning " sand used as a writing surface ").
the preferred plural of " abacus " is a subject of disagreement , with both " abacuses " and " abaci " in use .
the user of an abacus is called an " abacist ".
the period 20000000 bc saw the first appearance of the sumerian abacus , a table of successive columns which delimited the successive orders of magnitude of their sexagesimal number system .
some scholars point to a character from the babylonian cuneiform which may have been derived from a representation of the abacus .
it is the belief of old babylonian scholars such as carruccio that old babylonians " may have used the abacus for the operations of addition and subtraction ; however , this primitive device proved difficult to use for more complex calculations ".
the use of the abacus in ancient egypt is mentioned by the greek historian herodotus , who writes that the egyptians manipulated the pebbles from right to left , opposite in direction to the greek left-to-right method .
archaeologists have found ancient disks of various sizes that are thought to have been used as counters .
however , wall depictions of this instrument have not been discovered .
during the achaemenid empire , around 600 bc the persians first began to use the abacus .
under the parthian , sassanian and iranian empires , scholars concentrated on exchanging knowledge and inventions with the countries around them india , china , and the roman empire , when it is thought to have been exported to other countries .
the earliest archaeological evidence for the use of the greek abacus dates to the 5th century bc .
also demosthenes ( 300 bc300 bc ) talked of the need to use pebbles for calculations too difficult for your head .
a play by alexis from the 4th century bc mentions an abacus and pebbles for accounting , and both diogenes and polybius mention men that sometimes stood for more and sometimes for less , like the pebbles on an abacus .
the greek abacus was a table of wood or marble , pre-set with small counters in wood or metal for mathematical calculations .
this greek abacus saw use in achaemenid persia , the etruscan civilization , ancient rome and , until the french revolution , the western christian world .
a tablet found on the greek island salamis in 1000 ad ( the salamis tablet ), dates back to 300 bc , making it the oldest counting board discovered so far .
it is a slab of white marble long , wide , and thick , on which are 5 groups of markings .
in the center of the tablet is a set of 5 parallel lines equally divided by a vertical line , capped with a semicircle at the intersection of the bottom-most horizontal line and the single vertical line .
below these lines is a wide space with a horizontal crack dividing it .
below this crack is another group of eleven parallel lines , again divided into two sections by a line perpendicular to them , but with the semicircle at the top of the intersection ; the third , sixth and ninth of these lines are marked with a cross where they intersect with the vertical line .
also from this time frame the " darius vase " was unearthed in 1000 .
it was covered with pictures including a " treasurer " holding a wax tablet in one hand while manipulating counters on a table with the other .
the earliest known written documentation of the chinese abacus dates to the 2nd century bc .
the chinese abacus , known as the " suanpan " (, lit .
" counting tray "), is typically tall and comes in various widths depending on the operator .
it usually has more than seven rods .
there are two beads on each rod in the upper deck and five beads each in the bottom .
the beads are usually rounded and made of a hardwood .
the beads are counted by moving them up or down towards the beam .
if you move them toward the beam , you count their value .
if you move away , you don ' t count their value .
the " suanpan " can be reset to the starting position instantly by a quick movement along the horizontal axis to spin all the beads away from the horizontal beam at the center .
" suanpan " can be used for functions other than counting .
unlike the simple counting board used in elementary schools , very efficient suanpan techniques have been developed to do multiplication , division , addition , subtraction , square root and cube root operations at high speed .
there are currently schools teaching students how to use it .
in the long scroll " along the river during the qingming festival " painted by zhang zeduan during the song dynasty ( 9000000 ), a " suanpan " is clearly visible beside an account book and doctor 's prescriptions on the counter of an apothecary 's ( feibao ).
the similarity of the roman abacus to the chinese one suggests that one could have inspired the other , as there is some evidence of a trade relationship between the roman empire and china .
however , no direct connection can be demonstrated , and the similarity of the abaci may be coincidental , both ultimately arising from counting with five fingers per hand .
where the roman model ( like most modern korean and japanese ) has 4 plus 1 bead per decimal place , the standard " suanpan " has 5 plus 2 .
( incidentally , this allows use with a hexadecimal numeral system , which was used for traditional chinese measures of weight .)
instead of running on wires as in the chinese , korean , and japanese models , the beads of roman model run in grooves , presumably making arithmetic calculations much slower .
another possible source of the " suanpan " is chinese counting rods , which operated with a decimal system but lacked the concept of zero as a place holder .
the zero was probably introduced to the chinese in the tang dynasty ( 600000 ) when travel in the indian ocean and the middle east would have provided direct contact with india , allowing them to acquire the concept of zero and the decimal point from indian merchants and mathematicians .
the normal method of calculation in ancient rome , as in greece , was by moving counters on a smooth table .
originally pebbles (" calculi ") were used .
later , and in medieval europe , jetons were manufactured .
marked lines indicated units , fives , tens etc .
as in the roman numeral system .
this system of ' counter casting ' continued into the late roman empire and in medieval europe , and persisted in limited use into the nineteenth century .
due to pope sylvester ii 's reintroduction of the abacus with very useful modifications , it became widely used in europe once again during the 10th century this abacus used beads on wires , unlike the traditional roman counting boards , which meant the abacus could be used much faster .
writing in the 1st century bc , horace refers to the wax abacus , a board covered with a thin layer of black wax on which columns and figures were inscribed using a stylus .
one example of archaeological evidence of the roman abacus , shown here in reconstruction , dates to the 1st century ad .
it has eight long grooves containing up to five beads in each and eight shorter grooves having either one or no beads in each .
the groove marked i indicates units , x tens , and so on up to millions .
the beads in the shorter grooves denote fives five units , five tens etc ., essentially in a bi-quinary coded decimal system , obviously related to the roman numerals .
the short grooves on the right may have been used for marking roman " ounces " ( i . e .
fractions ).
there is no clear evidence for use of the abacus in india .
the decimal number system invented in india replaced the abacus in western europe .
the " abhidharmakoabhya " of vasubandhu ( 300-300 ), a sanskrit work on buddhist philosophy , says that the second-century ce philosopher vasumitra said that " placing a wick ( sanskrit " vartik ") on the number one (" ekka ") means it is a one , while placing the wick on the number hundred means it is called a hundred , and on the number one thousand means it is a thousand ".
it is unclear exactly what this arrangement may have been .
around the 5th century , indian clerks were already finding new ways of recording the contents of the abacus .
hindu texts used the term " nya " ( zero ) to indicate the empty column on the abacus .
in japanese , the abacus is called " soroban " (, lit .
" counting tray "), imported from china in the 10th century .
it was probably in use by the working class a century or more before the ruling class started , as the class structure did not allow for devices used by the lower class to be adopted or used by the ruling class .
the 1/4 abacus , which is suited to decimal calculation , appeared circa 1000 , and became widespread as the japanese abandoned hexadecimal weight calculation which was still common in china .
the abacus is still manufactured in japan today even with the proliferation , practicality , and affordability of pocket electronic calculators .
the use of the soroban is still taught in japanese primary schools as part of mathematics , primarily as an aid to faster mental calculation .
using visual imagery of a soroban , one can arrive at the answer in the same time as , or even faster than , is possible with a physical instrument .
the chinese abacus migrated from china to korea around 1000 ad .
koreans call it " jupan " (), " supan " () or " jusan " ().
some sources mention the use of an abacus called a " nepohualtzintzin " in ancient aztec culture .
this mesoamerican abacus used a 5-digit base-20 system .
the word nephualtzintzin comes from nahuatl and it is formed by the roots ; " ne " personal -; " phual " or " phualli " the account -; and " tzintzin " small similar elements .
its complete meaning was taken as : counting with small similar elements by somebody .
its use was taught in the calmecac to the " temalpouhqueh " , who were students dedicated to take the accounts of skies , from childhood .
the nephualtzintzin was divided in two main parts separated by a bar or intermediate cord .
in the left part there were four beads , which in the first row have unitary values ( 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 ), and in the right side there are three beads with values of 5 , 10 , and 10 respectively .
in order to know the value of the respective beads of the upper rows , it is enough to multiply by 20 ( by each row ), the value of the corresponding account in the first row .
altogether , there were 10 rows with 7 beads in each one , which made up 90 beads in each nephualtzintzin .
this was a basic number to understand , 7 times 10 , a close relation conceived between natural phenomena , the underworld and the cycles of the heavens .
one nephualtzintzin ( 90 ) represented the number of days that a season of the year lasts , two nephualtzitzin ( 100 ) is the number of days of the corn 's cycle , from its sowing to its harvest , three nephualtzintzin ( 200 ) is the number of days of a baby 's gestation , and four nephualtzintzin ( 300 ) completed a cycle and approximate a year ( 1 days short ).
when translated into modern computer arithmetic , the nephualtzintzin amounted to the rank from 10 to the 10 in floating point , which calculated stellar as well as infinitesimal amounts with absolute precision , meant that no round off was allowed .
the rediscovery of the nephualtzintzin was due to the mexican engineer david esparza hidalgo , who in his wanderings throughout mexico found diverse engravings and paintings of this instrument and reconstructed several of them made in gold , jade , encrustations of shell , etc .
there have also been found very old nephualtzintzin attributed to the olmec culture , and even some bracelets of mayan origin , as well as a diversity of forms and materials in other cultures .
george i . sanchez , " arithmetic in maya ", austin-texas , 1000 found another base 5 , base 4 abacus in the yucatn peninsula that also computed calendar data .
this was a finger abacus , on one hand 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 were used ; and on the other hand 0 , 1 , 2 and 3 were used .
note the use of zero at the beginning and end of the two cycles .
sanchez worked with sylvanus morley , a noted mayanist .
the quipu of the incas was a system of colored knotted cords used to record numerical data , like advanced tally sticks but not used to perform calculations .
calculations were carried out using a yupana ( quechua for " counting tool "; see figure ) which was still in use after the conquest of peru .
the working principle of a yupana is unknown , but in 2000 an explanation of the mathematical basis of these instruments was proposed by italian mathematician nicolino de pasquale .
by comparing the form of several yupanas , researchers found that calculations were based using the fibonacci sequence 1 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 and powers of 10 , 20 and 40 as place values for the different fields in the instrument .
using the fibonacci sequence would keep the number of grains within any one field at a minimum .
the russian abacus , the " schoty " (), usually has a single slanted deck , with ten beads on each wire ( except one wire , usually positioned near the user , with four beads for quarter-ruble fractions ).
older models have another 4-bead wire for quarter-kopeks , which were minted until 1000 .
the russian abacus is often used vertically , with wires from left to right in the manner of a book .
the wires are usually bowed to bulge upward in the center , to keep the beads pinned to either of the two sides .
it is cleared when all the beads are moved to the right .
during manipulation , beads are moved to the left .
for easy viewing , the middle 2 beads on each wire ( the 5th and 6th bead ) usually are of a different color from the other eight beads .
likewise , the left bead of the thousands wire ( and the million wire , if present ) may have a different color .
as a simple , cheap and reliable device , the russian abacus was in use in all shops and markets throughout the former soviet union , and the usage of it was taught in most schools until the 1000s .
even the 1000 invention of mechanical calculator , odhner arithmometer , had not replaced them in russia and likewise the mass production of felix arithmometers since 1000 did not significantly reduce their use in the soviet union .
the russian abacus began to lose popularity only after the mass production of microcalculators had started in the soviet union in 1000 .
today it is regarded as an archaism and replaced by the handheld calculator .
the russian abacus was brought to france around 1000 by the mathematician jean-victor poncelet , who served in napoleon 's army and had been a prisoner of war in russia .
the abacus had fallen out of use in western europe in the 10th century with the rise of decimal notation and algorismic methods .
to poncelet 's french contemporaries , it was something new .
poncelet used it , not for any applied purpose , but as a teaching and demonstration aid .
the turks and the armenian people also used abaci similar to the russian schoty .
it was named a " coulba " by the turks and a " choreb " by the armenians .
around the world , abaci have been used in pre-schools and elementary schools as an aid in teaching the numeral system and arithmetic .
in western countries , a bead frame similar to the russian abacus but with straight wires and a vertical frame has been common ( see image ).
it is still often seen as a plastic or wooden toy .
the wire frame may be used either with positional notation like other abaci ( thus the 10-wire version may represent numbers up to 9 , 900 , 900 , 900 ), or each bead may represent one unit ( so that e . g .
70 can be represented by shifting all beads on 7 wires and 4 beads on the 8th wire , so numbers up to 100 may be represented ).
in the bead frame shown , the gap between the 5th and 6th wire , corresponding to the color change between the 5th and the 6th bead on each wire , suggests the latter use .
the red-and-white abacus is used in contemporary primary schools for a wide range of number-related lessons .
the twenty bead version , referred to by its dutch name " rekenrek " (" calculating frame "), is often used , sometimes on a string of beads , sometimes on a rigid framework .
an adapted abacus , invented by tim cranmer , called a cranmer abacus is still commonly used by individuals who are blind .
a piece of soft fabric or rubber is placed behind the beads so that they do not move inadvertently .
this keeps the beads in place while the users feel or manipulate them .
they use an abacus to perform the mathematical functions multiplication , division , addition , subtraction , square root and cube root .
although blind students have benefited from talking calculators , the abacus is still very often taught to these students in early grades , both in public schools and state schools for the blind .
the abacus teaches mathematical skills that can never be replaced with talking calculators and is an important learning tool for blind students .
blind students also complete mathematical assignments using a braille-writer and nemeth code ( a type of braille code for mathematics ) but large multiplication and long division problems can be long and difficult .
the abacus gives blind and visually impaired students a tool to compute mathematical problems that equals the speed and mathematical knowledge required by their sighted peers using pencil and paper .
many blind people find this number machine a very useful tool throughout life .
the binary abacus is used to explain how computers manipulate numbers .
the abacus shows how numbers , letters , and signs can be stored in a binary system on a computer , or via ascii .
the device consists of a series of beads on parallel wires arranged in three separate rows .
the beads represent a switch on the computer in either an " on " or " off " position .
acid
an acid is a molecule or ion capable of donating a hydron ( proton or hydrogen ion h ), or , alternatively , capable of forming a covalent bond with an electron pair ( a lewis acid ).
the first category of acids is the proton donors or brnsted acids .
in the special case of aqueous solutions , proton donors form the hydronium ion ho and are known as arrhenius acids .
brnsted and lowry generalized the arrhenius theory to include non-aqueous solvents .
a brnsted or arrhenius acid usually contains a hydrogen atom bonded to a chemical structure that is still energetically favorable after loss of h .
aqueous arrhenius acids have characteristic properties which provide a practical description of an acid .
acids form aqueous solutions with a sour taste , can turn blue litmus red , and react with bases and certain metals ( like calcium ) to form salts .
the word " acid " is derived from the latin " acidus/acre " meaning " sour ".
an aqueous solution of an acid has a ph less than 7 and is colloquially also referred to as ' acid ' ( as in ' dissolved in acid '), while the strict definition refers only to the solute .
a lower ph means a higher acidity , and thus a higher concentration of positive hydrogen ions in the solution .
chemicals or substances having the property of an acid are said to be acidic .
common aqueous acids include hydrochloric acid ( a solution of hydrogen chloride which is found in gastric acid in the stomach and activates digestive enzymes ), acetic acid ( vinegar is a dilute aqueous solution of this liquid ), sulfuric acid ( used in car batteries ), and citric acid ( found in citrus fruits ).
as these examples show , acids ( in the colloquial sense ) can be solutions or pure substances , and can be derived from acids ( in the strict sense ) that are solids , liquids , or gases .
strong acids and some concentrated weak acids are corrosive , but there are exceptions such as carboranes and boric acid .
the second category of acids are lewis acids , which form a covalent bond with an electron pair .
an example is boron trifluoride ( bf ), whose boron atom has a vacant orbital which can form a covalent bond by sharing a lone pair of electrons on an atom in a base , for example the nitrogen atom in ammonia ( nh ).
lewis considered this as a generalization of the brnsted definition , so that an acid is a chemical species that accepts electron pairs either directly " or " by releasing protons ( h ) into the solution , which then accept electron pairs .
however , hydrogen chloride , acetic acid , and most other brnsted-lowry acids cannot form a covalent bond with an electron pair and are therefore not lewis acids .
conversely , many lewis acids are not arrhenius or brnsted-lowry acids .
in modern terminology , an " acid " is implicitly a brnsted acid and not a lewis acid , since chemists almost always refer to a lewis acid explicitly as " a lewis acid ".
modern definitions are concerned with the fundamental chemical reactions common to all acids .
most acids encountered in everyday life are aqueous solutions , or can be dissolved in water , so the arrhenius and brnsted-lowry definitions are the most relevant .
the brnsted-lowry definition is the most widely used definition ; unless otherwise specified , acid-base reactions are assumed to involve the transfer of a proton ( h ) from an acid to a base .
hydronium ions are acids according to all three definitions .
interestingly , although alcohols and amines can be brnsted-lowry acids , they can also function as lewis bases due to the lone pairs of electrons on their oxygen and nitrogen atoms .
the swedish chemist svante arrhenius attributed the properties of acidity to hydrogen ions ( h ) or protons in 1000 .
an arrhenius acid is a substance that , when added to water , increases the concentration of h ions in the water .
note that chemists often write h (" aq ") and refer to the hydrogen ion when describing acid-base reactions but the free hydrogen nucleus , a proton , does not exist alone in water , it exists as the hydronium ion , ho .
thus , an arrhenius acid can also be described as a substance that increases the concentration of hydronium ions when added to water .
examples include molecular substances such as hcl and acetic acid .
an arrhenius base , on the other hand , is a substance which increases the concentration of hydroxide ( oh ) ions when dissolved in water .
this decreases the concentration of hydronium because the ions react to form ho molecules :
ho + oh ho + ho
due to this equilibrium , any increase in the concentration of hydronium is accompanied by a decrease in the concentration of hydroxide .
thus , an arrhenius acid could also be said to be one that decreases hydroxide concentration , while an arrhenius base increases it .
in an acidic solution , the concentration of hydronium ions is greater than 10 moles per liter .
since ph is defined as the negative logarithm of the concentration of hydronium ions , acidic solutions thus have a ph of less than 7 .
while the arrhenius concept is useful for describing many reactions , it is also quite limited in its scope .
in 1000 chemists johannes nicolaus brnsted and thomas martin lowry independently recognized that acid-base reactions involve the transfer of a proton .
a brnsted-lowry acid ( or simply brnsted acid ) is a species that donates a proton to a brnsted-lowry base .
brnsted-lowry acid-base theory has several advantages over arrhenius theory .
consider the following reactions of acetic acid ( chcooh ), the organic acid that gives vinegar its characteristic taste :
both theories easily describe the first reaction : chcooh acts as an arrhenius acid because it acts as a source of ho when dissolved in water , and it acts as a brnsted acid by donating a proton to water .
in the second example chcooh undergoes the same transformation , in this case donating a proton to ammonia ( nh ), but does not relate to the arrhenius definition of an acid because the reaction does not produce hydronium .
nevertheless , chcooh is both an arrhenius and a brnsted-lowry acid .
brnsted-lowry theory can be used to describe reactions of molecular compounds in nonaqueous solution or the gas phase .
hydrogen chloride ( hcl ) and ammonia combine under several different conditions to form ammonium chloride , nhcl .
in aqueous solution hcl behaves as hydrochloric acid and exists as hydronium and chloride ions .
the following reactions illustrate the limitations of arrhenius 's definition :
as with the acetic acid reactions , both definitions work for the first example , where water is the solvent and hydronium ion is formed by the hcl solute .
the next two reactions do not involve the formation of ions but are still proton-transfer reactions .
in the second reaction hydrogen chloride and ammonia ( dissolved in benzene ) react to form solid ammonium chloride in a benzene solvent and in the third gaseous hcl and nh combine to form the solid .
a third , only marginally related concept was proposed in 1000 by gilbert n . lewis , which includes reactions with acid-base characteristics that do not involve a proton transfer .
a lewis acid is a species that accepts a pair of electrons from another species ; in other words , it is an electron pair acceptor .
brnsted acid-base reactions are proton transfer reactions while lewis acid-base reactions are electron pair transfers .
many lewis acids are not brnsted-lowry acids .
contrast how the following reactions are described in terms of acid-base chemistry : in the first reaction a fluoride ion , f , gives up an electron pair to boron trifluoride to form the product tetrafluoroborate .
fluoride " loses " a pair of valence electrons because the electrons shared in the bf bond are located in the region of space between the two atomic nuclei and are therefore more distant from the fluoride nucleus than they are in the lone fluoride ion .
bf is a lewis acid because it accepts the electron pair from fluoride .
this reaction cannot be described in terms of brnsted theory because there is no proton transfer .
the second reaction can be described using either theory .
a proton is transferred from an unspecified brnsted acid to ammonia , a brnsted base ; alternatively , ammonia acts as a lewis base and transfers a lone pair of electrons to form a bond with a hydrogen ion .
the species that gains the electron pair is the lewis acid ; for example , the oxygen atom in ho gains a pair of electrons when one of the ho bonds is broken and the electrons shared in the bond become localized on oxygen .
depending on the context , a lewis acid may also be described as an oxidizer or an electrophile .
organic brnsted acids , such as acetic , citric , or oxalic acid , are not lewis acids .
they dissociate in water to produce a lewis acid , h , but at the same time also yield an equal amount of a lewis base ( acetate , citrate , or oxalate , respectively , for the acids mentioned ).
few , if any , of the acids discussed in the following are lewis acids .
reactions of acids are often generalized in the form ha h + a , where ha represents the acid and a is the conjugate base .
this reaction is referred to as protolysis .
the protonated form ( ha ) of an acid is also sometimes referred to as the free acid .
acid-base conjugate pairs differ by one proton , and can be interconverted by the addition or removal of a proton ( protonation and deprotonation , respectively ).
note that the acid can be the charged species and the conjugate base can be neutral in which case the generalized reaction scheme could be written as ha h + a .
in solution there exists an equilibrium between the acid and its conjugate base .
the equilibrium constant " k " is an expression of the equilibrium concentrations of the molecules or the ions in solution .
brackets indicate concentration , such that [ ho ] means " the concentration of ho ".
the acid dissociation constant " k " is generally used in the context of acid-base reactions .
the numerical value of " k " is equal to the product of the concentrations of the products divided by the concentration of the reactants , where the reactant is the acid ( ha ) and the products are the conjugate base and h . the stronger of two acids will have a higher " k " than the weaker acid ; the ratio of hydrogen ions to acid will be higher for the stronger acid as the stronger acid has a greater tendency to lose its proton .
because the range of possible values for " k " spans many orders of magnitude , a more manageable constant , p " k " is more frequently used , where p " k " = log " k ".
stronger acids have a smaller p " k " than weaker acids .
experimentally determined p " k " at 20c in aqueous solution are often quoted in textbooks and reference material .
in the classical naming system , acids are named according to their anions .
that ionic suffix is dropped and replaced with a new suffix ( and sometimes prefix ), according to the table below .
for example , hcl has chloride as its anion , so the - ide suffix makes it take the form hydrochloric acid .
in the iupac naming system , " aqueous " is simply added to the name of the ionic compound .
thus , for hydrogen chloride , the iupac name would be aqueous hydrogen chloride .
the prefix " hydro -" is added only if the acid is made up of just hydrogen and one other element .
classical naming system : the strength of an acid refers to its ability or tendency to lose a proton .
a strong acid is one that completely dissociates in water ; in other words , one mole of a strong acid ha dissolves in water yielding one mole of h and one mole of the conjugate base , a , and none of the protonated acid ha .
in contrast , a weak acid only partially dissociates and at equilibrium both the acid and the conjugate base are in solution .
examples of strong acids are hydrochloric acid ( hcl ), hydroiodic acid ( hi ), hydrobromic acid ( hbr ), perchloric acid ( hclo ), nitric acid ( hno ) and sulfuric acid ( hso ).
in water each of these essentially ionizes 100 %.
the stronger an acid is , the more easily it loses a proton , h . two key factors that contribute to the ease of deprotonation are the polarity of the ha bond and the size of atom a , which determines the strength of the ha bond .
acid strengths are also often discussed in terms of the stability of the conjugate base .
stronger acids have a larger " k " and a more negative p " k " than weaker acids .
sulfonic acids , which are organic oxyacids , are a class of strong acids .
a common example is toluenesulfonic acid ( tosylic acid ).
unlike sulfuric acid itself , sulfonic acids can be solids .
in fact , polystyrene functionalized into polystyrene sulfonate is a solid strongly acidic plastic that is filterable .
superacids are acids stronger than 100 % sulfuric acid .
examples of superacids are fluoroantimonic acid , magic acid and perchloric acid .
superacids can permanently protonate water to give ionic , crystalline hydronium " salts ".
they can also quantitatively stabilize carbocations .
while " k " measures the strength of an acid compound , the strength of an aqueous acid solution is measured by ph , which is an indication of the concentration of hydronium in the solution .
the ph of a simple solution of an acid compound in water is determined by the dilution of the compound and the compound 's " k ".
monoprotic acids are those acids that are able to donate one proton per molecule during the process of dissociation ( sometimes called ionization ) as shown below ( symbolized by ha ):
common examples of monoprotic acids in mineral acids include hydrochloric acid ( hcl ) and nitric acid ( hno ).
on the other hand , for organic acids the term mainly indicates the presence of one carboxylic acid group and sometimes these acids are known as monocarboxylic acid .
examples in organic acids include formic acid ( hcooh ), acetic acid ( chcooh ) and benzoic acid ( chcooh ).
polyprotic acids , also known as polybasic acids , are able to donate more than one proton per acid molecule , in contrast to monoprotic acids that only donate one proton per molecule .
specific types of polyprotic acids have more specific names , such as diprotic acid ( two potential protons to donate ) and triprotic acid ( three potential protons to donate ).
a diprotic acid ( here symbolized by ha ) can undergo one or two dissociations depending on the ph .
each dissociation has its own dissociation constant , k and k .
the first dissociation constant is typically greater than the second ; i . e ., " k " > " k ".
for example , sulfuric acid ( hso ) can donate one proton to form the bisulfate anion ( hso ), for which " k " is very large ; then it can donate a second proton to form the sulfate anion ( so ), wherein the " k " is intermediate strength .
the large " k " for the first dissociation makes sulfuric a strong acid .
in a similar manner , the weak unstable carbonic acid can lose one proton to form bicarbonate anion and lose a second to form carbonate anion ( co ).
both " k " values are small , but " k " > " k " .
a triprotic acid ( ha ) can undergo one , two , or three dissociations and has three dissociation constants , where " k " > " k " > " k ".
an inorganic example of a triprotic acid is orthophosphoric acid ( hpo ), usually just called phosphoric acid .
all three protons can be successively lost to yield hpo , then hpo , and finally po , the orthophosphate ion , usually just called phosphate .
even though the positions of the three protons on the original phosphoric acid molecule are equivalent , the successive " k " values differ since it is energetically less favorable to lose a proton if the conjugate base is more negatively charged .
an organic example of a triprotic acid is citric acid , which can successively lose three protons to finally form the citrate ion .
although the subsequent loss of each hydrogen ion is less favorable , all of the conjugate bases are present in solution .
the fractional concentration , "" ( alpha ), for each species can be calculated .
for example , a generic diprotic acid will generate 3 species in solution : ha , ha , and a .
the fractional concentrations can be calculated as below when given either the ph ( which can be converted to the [ h ]) or the concentrations of the acid with all its conjugate bases : a plot of these fractional concentrations against ph , for given " k " and " k ", is known as a bjerrum plot .
a pattern is observed in the above equations and can be expanded to the general " n " - protic acid that has been deprotonated " i " - times : \ alpha_ {\ ce h_ { n-i } a ^{ i -} }= asphalt
asphalt , also known as bitumen , is a sticky , black , and highly viscous liquid or semi-solid form of petroleum .
it may be found in natural deposits or may be a refined product , and is classed as a pitch .
before the 20th century , the term asphaltum was also used .
the word is derived from the ancient greek " sphaltos ".
the primary use ( 70 %) of asphalt is in road construction , where it is used as the glue or binder mixed with aggregate particles to create asphalt concrete .
its other main uses are for bituminous waterproofing products , including production of roofing felt and for sealing flat roofs .
the terms " asphalt " and " bitumen " are often used interchangeably to mean both natural and manufactured forms of the substance .
in american english , " asphalt " ( or " asphalt cement ") is commonly used for a refined residue from the distillation process of selected crude oils .
outside the united states , the product is often called " bitumen ", and geologists worldwide often prefer the term for the naturally occurring variety .
common colloquial usage often refers to various forms of asphalt as " tar ", as in the name of the la brea tar pits .
naturally occurring asphalt is sometimes specified by the term " crude bitumen ".
its viscosity is similar to that of cold molasses while the material obtained from the fractional distillation of crude oil boiling at is sometimes referred to as " refined bitumen ".
the canadian province of alberta has most of the world 's reserves of natural asphalt , covering , an area larger than england .
the word " asphalt " is derived from the late middle english , in turn from french " asphalte ", based on late latin " asphalton ", " asphaltum ", which is the latinisation of the greek (" sphaltos ", " sphalton "), a word meaning " asphalt/bitumen/pitch ", which perhaps derives from -, " without " and (" sfall "), " make fall ".
the first use of asphalt by the ancients was in the nature of a cement for securing or joining together various objects , and it thus seems likely that the name itself was expressive of this application .
specifically , herodotus mentioned that bitumen was brought to babylon to build its gigantic fortification wall .
from the greek , the word passed into late latin , and thence into french (" asphalte ") and english (" asphaltum " and " asphalt ").
in french , the term " asphalte " is used for naturally occurring asphalt-soaked limestone deposits , and for specialised manufactured products with fewer voids or greater bitumen content than the " asphaltic concrete " used to pave roads .
the expression " bitumen " originated in the sanskrit words " jatu ", meaning " pitch ," and " jatu-krit ", meaning " pitch creating " or " pitch producing " ( referring to coniferous or resinous trees ).
the latin equivalent is claimed by some to be originally " gwitu-men " ( pertaining to pitch ), and by others , " pixtumens " ( exuding or bubbling pitch ), which was subsequently shortened to " bitumen ", thence passing via french into english .
from the same root is derived the anglo-saxon word " cwidu " ( mastix ), the german word " kitt " ( cement or mastic ) and the old norse word " kvada ".
in british english , " bitumen " is used instead of " asphalt ."
the word " asphalt " is instead used to refer to asphalt concrete , a mixture of construction aggregate and asphalt itself ( also called " tarmac " in common parlance ).
bitumen mixed with clay was usually called " asphaltum ", but the term is less commonly used today .
in australian english , " bitumen " is often used as the generic term for road surfaces .
in american english , " asphalt " is equivalent to the british " bitumen ".
however , " asphalt " is also commonly used as a shortened form of " asphalt concrete " ( therefore equivalent to the british " asphalt " or " tarmac ").
in canadian english , the word " bitumen " is used to refer to the vast canadian deposits of extremely heavy crude oil , while " asphalt " is used for the oil refinery product .
diluted bitumen ( diluted with naphtha to make it flow in pipelines ) is known as " dilbit " in the canadian petroleum industry , while bitumen " upgraded " to synthetic crude oil is known as " syncrude ", and syncrude blended with bitumen is called " synbit ".
" bitumen " is still the preferred geological term for naturally occurring deposits of the solid or semi-solid form of petroleum .
" bituminous rock " is a form of sandstone impregnated with bitumen .
the tar sands of alberta , canada are a similar material .
neither of the terms " asphalt " or " bitumen " should be confused with tar or coal tars .
the components of asphalt include four main classes of compounds :
the naphthene aromatics and polar aromatics are typically the majority components .
most natural bitumens also contain organosulfur compounds , resulting in an overall sulfur content of up to 4 %.
nickel and vanadium are found at < 10 parts per million , as is typical of some petroleum .
the substance is soluble in carbon disulfide .
it is commonly modelled as a colloid , with asphaltenes as the dispersed phase and maltenes as the continuous phase .
" it is almost impossible to separate and identify all the different molecules of asphalt , because the number of molecules with different chemical structure is extremely large ".
asphalt may be confused with coal tar , which is a visually similar black , thermoplastic material produced by the destructive distillation of coal .
during the early and mid-20th century , when town gas was produced , coal tar was a readily available byproduct and extensively used as the binder for road aggregates .
the addition of coal tar to macadam roads led to the word " tarmac ", which is now used in common parlance to refer to road-making materials .
however , since the 1000s , when natural gas succeeded town gas , asphalt has completely overtaken the use of coal tar in these applications .
other examples of this confusion include the la brea tar pits and the canadian oil sands , both of which actually contain natural bitumen rather than tar .
" pitch " is another term sometimes informally used at times to refer to asphalt , as in pitch lake .
the majority of asphalt used commercially is obtained from petroleum .
nonetheless , large amounts of asphalt occur in concentrated form in nature .
naturally occurring deposits of bitumen are formed from the remains of ancient , microscopic algae ( diatoms ) and other once-living things .
these remains were deposited in the mud on the bottom of the ocean or lake where the organisms lived .
under the heat ( above 50c ) and pressure of burial deep in the earth , the remains were transformed into materials such as bitumen , kerogen , or petroleum .
natural deposits of bitumen include lakes such as the pitch lake in trinidad and tobago and lake bermudez in venezuela .
natural seeps occur in the la brea tar pits and in the dead sea .
bitumen also occurs in unconsolidated sandstones known as " oil sands " in alberta , canada , and the similar " tar sands " in utah , us .
the canadian province of alberta has most of the world 's reserves , in three huge deposits covering , an area larger than england or new york state .
these bituminous sands contain of commercially established oil reserves , giving canada the third largest oil reserves in the world .
although historically it was used without refining to pave roads , nearly all of the output is now used as raw material for oil refineries in canada and the united states .
the world 's largest deposit of natural bitumen , known as the athabasca oil sands , is located in the mcmurray formation of northern alberta .
this formation is from the early cretaceous , and is composed of numerous lenses of oil-bearing sand with up to 20 % oil .
isotopic studies show the oil deposits to be about 100 million years old .
two smaller but still very large formations occur in the peace river oil sands and the cold lake oil sands , to the west and southeast of the athabasca oil sands , respectively .
of the alberta deposits , only parts of the athabasca oil sands are shallow enough to be suitable for surface mining .
the other 80 % has to be produced by oil wells using enhanced oil recovery techniques like steam-assisted gravity drainage .
much smaller heavy oil or bitumen deposits also occur in the uinta basin in utah , us .
the tar sand triangle deposit , for example , is roughly 6 % bitumen .
bitumen may occur in hydrothermal veins .
an example of this is within the uinta basin of utah , in the us , where there is a swarm of laterally and vertically extensive veins composed of a solid hydrocarbon termed gilsonite .
these veins formed by the polymerization and solidification of hydrocarbons that were mobilized from the deeper oil shales of the green river formation during burial and diagenesis .
bitumen is similar to the organic matter in carbonaceous meteorites .
however , detailed studies have shown these materials to be distinct .
the vast alberta bitumen resources are considered to have started out as living material from marine plants and animals , mainly algae , that died millions of years ago when an ancient ocean covered alberta .
they were covered by mud , buried deeply over time , and gently cooked into oil by geothermal heat at a temperature of .
due to pressure from the rising of the rocky mountains in southwestern alberta , 80 to 50 million years ago , the oil was driven northeast hundreds of kilometres and trapped into underground sand deposits left behind by ancient river beds and ocean beaches , thus forming the oil sands .
the use of asphalt for waterproofing and as an adhesive dates at least to the fifth millennium bc in the early indus valley sites like mehrgarh , where it was used to line the baskets in which crops were gathered .
in the ancient middle east , the sumerians used natural bitumen deposits for mortar between bricks and stones , to cement parts of carvings , such as eyes , into place , for ship caulking , and for waterproofing .
the greek historian herodotus said hot bitumen was used as mortar in the walls of babylon .
the long euphrates tunnel beneath the river euphrates at babylon in the time of queen semiramis ( ca .
800 bc ) was reportedly constructed of burnt bricks covered with bitumen as a waterproofing agent .
bitumen was used by ancient egyptians to embalm mummies .
the persian word for asphalt is " moom ", which is related to the english word mummy .
the egyptians ' primary source of bitumen was the dead sea , which the romans knew as " palus asphaltites " ( asphalt lake ).
approximately 40 ad , dioscorides described the dead sea material as " judaicum bitumen ", and noted other places in the region where it could be found .
the sidon bitumen is thought to refer to materiall found at hasbeya .
pliny refers also to bitumen being found in epirus .
it was a valuable strategic resource , the object of the first known battle for a hydrocarbon depositbetween the seleucids and the nabateans in 300 bc .
in the ancient far east , natural bitumen was slowly boiled to get rid of the higher fractions , leaving a thermoplastic material of higher molecular weight that when layered on objects became quite hard upon cooling .
this was used to cover objects that needed waterproofing , such as scabbards and other items .
statuettes of household deities were also cast with this type of material in japan , and probably also in china .
in north america , archaeological recovery has indicated bitumen was sometimes used to adhere stone projectile points to wooden shafts .
in canada , aboriginal people used bitumen seeping out of the banks of the athabasca and other rivers to waterproof birch bark canoes , and also heated it in smudge pots to ward off mosquitoes in the summer .
in 1000 , pierre belon described in his work " observations " that " pissasphalto ", a mixture of pitch and bitumen , was used in the republic of ragusa ( now dubrovnik , croatia ) for tarring of ships .
an 1000 edition of " mechanics magazine " cites an early use of asphalt in france .
a pamphlet dated 1000 , by " a certain monsieur d ' eyrinys , states that he had discovered the existence ( of asphaltum ) in large quantities in the vicinity of neufchatel ", and that he proposed to use it in a variety of ways " principally in the construction of air-proof granaries , and in protecting , by means of the arches , the water-courses in the city of paris from the intrusion of dirt and filth ", which at that time made the water unusable .
" he expatiates also on the excellence of this material for forming level and durable terraces " in palaces , " the notion of forming such terraces in the streets not one likely to cross the brain of a parisian of that generation ".
but the substance was generally neglected in france until the revolution of 1000 .
in the 1000s there was a surge of interest , and asphalt became widely used " for pavements , flat roofs , and the lining of cisterns , and in england , some use of it had been made of it for similar purposes ".
its rise in europe was " a sudden phenomenon ", after natural deposits were found " in france at osbann ( bas-rhin ), the parc ( ain ) and the puy-de-la - poix ( puy-de-dme )", although it could also be made artificially .
one of the earliest uses in france was the laying of about 20 , 000 square yards of seyssel asphalt at the place de la concorde in 1000 .
among the earlier uses of bitumen in the united kingdom was for etching .
william salmon 's " polygraphice " ( 1000 ) provides a recipe for varnish used in etching , consisting of three ounces of virgin wax , two ounces of mastic , and one ounce of asphaltum .
by the fifth edition in 1000 , he had included more asphaltum recipes from other sources .
the first british patent for the use of asphalt was " cassell 's patent asphalte or bitumen " in 1000 .
then on 20 november 1000 , richard tappin claridge patented the use of seyssel asphalt ( patent # 7000 ), for use in asphalte pavement , having seen it employed in france and belgium when visiting with frederick walter simms , who worked with him on the introduction of asphalt to britain .
dr t . lamb phipson writes that his father , samuel ryland phipson , a friend of claridge , was also " instrumental in introducing the asphalte pavement ( in 1000 )".
indeed , mastic pavements had been previously employed at vauxhall by a competitor of claridge , but without success .
claridge obtained a patent in scotland on 20 march 1000 , and obtained a patent in ireland on 20 april 1000 .
in 1000 , extensions for the 1000 patent and for both 1000 patents were sought by the trustees of a company previously formed by claridge .
" claridge 's patent asphalte company " formed in 1000 for the purpose of introducing to britain " asphalte in its natural state from the mine at pyrimont seysell in france "," laid one of the first asphalt pavements in whitehall ".
trials were made of the pavement in 1000 on the footway in whitehall , the stable at knightsbridge barracks , " and subsequently on the space at the bottom of the steps leading from waterloo place to st . james park ".
" the formation in 1000 of claridge 's patent asphalte company ( with a distinguished list of aristocratic patrons , and marc and isambard brunel as , respectively , a trustee and consulting engineer ), gave an enormous impetus to the development of a british asphalt industry ".
" by the end of 1000 , at least two other companies , robinson 's and the bastenne company , were in production ", with asphalt being laid as paving at brighton , herne bay , canterbury , kensington , the strand , and a large floor area in bunhill-row , while meantime claridge 's whitehall paving " continue ( d ) in good order ".
in 1000 , there was a flurry of entrepreneurial activity involving asphalt , which had uses beyond paving .
for example , asphalt could also be used for flooring , damp proofing in buildings , and for waterproofing of various types of pools and baths , both of which were also proliferating in the 10th century .
on the london stockmarket , there were various claims as to the exclusivity of asphalt quality from france , germany and england .
and numerous patents were granted in france , with similar numbers of patent applications being denied in england due to their similarity to each other .
in england , " claridge 's was the type most used in the 1000s and 50s ".
in 1000 , claridge 's company entered into a joint venture to produce tar-bound macadam , with materials manufactured through a subsidiary company called clarmac roads ltd . two products resulted , namely " clarmac ", and " clarphalte ", with the former being manufactured by clarmac roads and the latter by claridge 's patent asphalte co ., although " clarmac " was more widely used .
however , the first world war ruined the clarmac company , which entered into liquidation in 1000 .
the failure of clarmac roads ltd had a flow-on effect to claridge 's company , which was itself compulsorily wound up , ceasing operations in 1000 , having invested a substantial amount of funds into the new venture , both at the outset and in a subsequent attempt to save the clarmac company .
the first use of bitumen in the new world was by indigenous peoples .
on the west coast , as early as the 10th century , the tongva , luiseo and chumash peoples collected the naturally occurring bitumen that seeped to the surface above underlying petroleum deposits .
all three groups used the substance as an adhesive .
it is found on many different artifacts of tools and ceremonial items .
for example , it was used on rattles to adhere gourds or turtle shells to rattle handles .
it was also used in decorations .
small round shell beads were often set in asphaltum to provide decorations .
it was used as a sealant on baskets to make them watertight for carrying water , possibly poisoning those who drank the water .
asphalt was used also to seal the planks on ocean-going canoes .
roads in the us have been paved with materials that include asphalt since at least 1000 , when a street in front of the newark ( new jersey ) city hall was paved .
in many cases , these early pavings were made from naturally occurring " bituminous rock ", such as at ritchie mines in macfarlan in ritchie county , west virginia from 1000 to 1000 .
in 1000 , asphalt-based paving was used to pave pennsylvania avenue in washington dc , in time for the celebration of the national centennial .
asphalt was also used for flooring , paving and waterproofing of baths and swimming pools during the early 20th century , following similar trends in europe .
canada has the world 's largest deposit of natural bitumen in the athabasca oil sands , and canadian first nations along the athabasca river had long used it to waterproof their canoes .
in 1000 , a cree named wa-pa-su brought a sample for trade to henry kelsey of the hudsons bay company , who was the first recorded european to see it .
however , it wasn ' t until 1000 that fur trader and explorer alexander mackenzie saw the athabasca oil sands and said , " at about 20 miles from the fork ( of the athabasca and clearwater rivers ) are some bituminous fountains into which a pole of 20 feet long may be inserted without the least resistance ."
the value of the deposit was obvious from the start , but the means of extracting the bitumen was not .
the nearest town , fort mcmurray , alberta , was a small fur trading post , other markets were far away , and transportation costs were too high to ship the raw bituminous sand for paving .
in 1000 , sidney ells of the federal mines branch experimented with separation techniques and used the product to pave 600 feet of road in edmonton , alberta .
other roads in alberta were paved with material extracted from oil sands , but it was generally not economic .
during the 1000s dr . karl a . clark of the alberta research council patented a hot water oil separation process and entrepreneur robert c . fitzsimmons built the bitumount oil separation plant , which between 1000 and 1000 produced up to per day of bitumen using dr . clark 's method .
most of the bitumen was used for waterproofing roofs , but other uses included fuels , lubrication oils , printers ink , medicines , rust - and acid-proof paints , fireproof roofing , street paving , patent leather , and fence post preservatives .
eventually fitzsimmons ran out of money and the plant was taken over by the alberta government .
today the bitumount plant is a provincial historic site .
bitumen was used in early photographic technology .
in 1000 or 1000 , it was used by french scientist joseph nicphore nipce to make the oldest surviving photograph from nature .
the bitumen was thinly coated onto a pewter plate which was then exposed in a camera .
exposure to light hardened the bitumen and made it insoluble , so that when it was subsequently rinsed with a solvent only the sufficiently light-struck areas remained .
many hours of exposure in the camera were required , making bitumen impractical for ordinary photography , but from the 1000s to the 1000s it was in common use as a photoresist in the production of printing plates for various photomechanical printing processes .
bitumen was the nemesis of many artists during the 10th century .
although widely used for a time , it ultimately proved unstable for use in oil painting , especially when mixed with the most common diluents , such as linseed oil , varnish and turpentine .
unless thoroughly diluted , bitumen never fully solidifies and will in time corrupt the other pigments with which it comes into contact .
the use of bitumen as a glaze to set in shadow or mixed with other colors to render a darker tone resulted in the eventual deterioration of many paintings , for instance those of delacroix .
perhaps the most famous example of the destructiveness of bitumen is thodore gricault 's raft of the medusa ( 10000000 ), where his use of bitumen caused the brilliant colors to degenerate into dark greens and blacks and the paint and canvas to buckle .
the vast majority of refined asphalt is used in construction : primarily as a constituent of products used in paving and roofing applications .
according to the requirements of the end use , asphalt is produced to specification .
this is achieved either by refining or blending .
it is estimated that the current world use of asphalt is approximately 100 million tonnes per year .
approximately 80 % of all the asphalt produced is used as the binder in asphalt concrete for roads .
it is also used in other paved areas such as airport runways , car parks and footways .
typically , the production of asphalt concrete involves mixing fine and coarse aggregates such as sand , gravel and crushed rock with asphalt , which acts as the binding agent .
other materials , such as recycled polymers ( e . g ., rubber tyres ), may be added to the asphalt to modify its properties according to the application for which the asphalt is ultimately intended .
a further 10 % of global asphalt production is used in roofing applications , where its waterproofing qualities are invaluable .
the remaining 5 % of asphalt is used mainly for sealing and insulating purposes in a variety of building materials , such as pipe coatings , carpet tile backing and paint .
asphalt is applied in the construction and maintenance of many structures , systems , and components , such as the following :
the largest use of asphalt is for making asphalt concrete for road surfaces ; this accounts for approximately 80 % of the asphalt consumed in the united states .
asphalt concrete pavement mixes are typically composed of 5 % asphalt cement and 90 % aggregates ( stone , sand , and gravel ).
due to its highly viscous nature , asphalt cement must be heated so it can be mixed with the aggregates at the asphalt mixing facility .
the temperature required varies depending upon characteristics of the asphalt and the aggregates , but warm-mix asphalt technologies allow producers to reduce the temperature required .
there are about 4 , 000 asphalt concrete mixing plants in the us , and a similar number in europe .
when maintenance is performed on asphalt pavements , such as milling to remove a worn or damaged surface , the removed material can be returned to a facility for processing into new pavement mixtures .
the asphalt in the removed material can be reactivated and put back to use in new pavement mixes .
with some 90 % of paved roads being constructed of or surfaced with asphalt , a substantial amount of asphalt pavement material is reclaimed each year .
according to industry surveys conducted annually by the federal highway administration and the national asphalt pavement association , more than 90 % of the asphalt removed each year from road surfaces during widening and resurfacing projects is reused as part of new pavements , roadbeds , shoulders and embankments .
asphalt concrete paving is widely used in airports around the world .
due to the sturdiness and ability to be repaired quickly , it is widely used for runways .
mastic asphalt is a type of asphalt that differs from dense graded asphalt ( asphalt concrete ) in that it has a higher asphalt ( binder ) content , usually around 700 % of the whole aggregate mix , as opposed to rolled asphalt concrete , which has only around 5 % asphalt .
this thermoplastic substance is widely used in the building industry for waterproofing flat roofs and tanking underground .
mastic asphalt is heated to a temperature of and is spread in layers to form an impervious barrier about thick .
a number of technologies allow asphalt to be mixed at much lower temperatures .
these involve mixing with petroleum solvents to form " cutbacks " with reduced melting point or mixing with water to turn the asphalt into an emulsion .
asphalt emulsions contain up to 70 % asphalt and typically less than 1 . 5 % chemical additives .
there are two main types of emulsions with different affinity for aggregates , cationic and anionic .
asphalt emulsions are used in a wide variety of applications .
chipseal involves spraying the road surface with asphalt emulsion followed by a layer of crushed rock , gravel or crushed slag .
slurry seal involves the creation of a mixture of asphalt emulsion and fine crushed aggregate that is spread on the surface of a road .
cold-mixed asphalt can also be made from asphalt emulsion to create pavements similar to hot-mixed asphalt , several inches in depth , and asphalt emulsions are also blended into recycled hot-mix asphalt to create low-cost pavements .
synthetic crude oil , also known as syncrude , is the output from a bitumen upgrader facility used in connection with oil sand production in canada .
bituminous sands are mined using enormous ( 100 ton capacity ) power shovels and loaded into even larger ( 400 ton capacity ) dump trucks for movement to an upgrading facility .
the process used to extract the bitumen from the sand is a hot water process originally developed by dr . karl clark of the university of alberta during the 1000s .
after extraction from the sand , the bitumen is fed into a bitumen upgrader which converts it into a light crude oil equivalent .
this synthetic substance is fluid enough to be transferred through conventional oil pipelines and can be fed into conventional oil refineries without any further treatment .
by 2000 canadian bitumen upgraders were producing over per day of synthetic crude oil , of which 70 % was exported to oil refineries in the united states .
in alberta , five bitumen upgraders produce synthetic crude oil and a variety of other products : the suncor energy upgrader near fort mcmurray , alberta produces synthetic crude oil plus diesel fuel ; the syncrude canada , canadian natural resources , and nexen upgraders near fort mcmurray produce synthetic crude oil ; and the shell scotford upgrader near edmonton produces synthetic crude oil plus an intermediate feedstock for the nearby shell oil refinery .
a sixth upgrader , under construction in 2000 near redwater , alberta , will upgrade half of its crude bitumen directly to diesel fuel , with the remainder of the output being sold as feedstock to nearby oil refineries and petrochemical plants .
canadian bitumen does not differ substantially from oils such as venezuelan extra-heavy and mexican heavy oil in chemical composition , and the real difficulty is moving the extremely viscous bitumen through oil pipelines to the refinery .
many modern oil refineries are extremely sophisticated and can process non-upgraded bitumen directly into products such as gasoline , diesel fuel , and refined asphalt without any preprocessing .
this is particularly common in areas such as the us gulf coast , where refineries were designed to process venezuelan and mexican oil , and in areas such as the us midwest where refineries were rebuilt to process heavy oil as domestic light oil production declined .
given the choice , such heavy oil refineries usually prefer to buy bitumen rather than synthetic oil because the cost is lower , and in some cases because they prefer to produce more diesel fuel and less gasoline .
by 2000 canadian production and exports of non-upgraded bitumen exceeded that of synthetic crude oil at over per day , of which about 60 % was exported to the united states .
because of the difficulty of moving crude bitumen through pipelines , non-upgraded bitumen is usually diluted with natural-gas condensate in a form called dilbit or with synthetic crude oil , called synbit .
however , to meet international competition , much non-upgraded bitumen is now sold as a blend of multiple grades of bitumen , conventional crude oil , synthetic crude oil , and condensate in a standardized benchmark product such as western canadian select .
this sour , heavy crude oil blend is designed to have uniform refining characteristics to compete with internationally marketed heavy oils such as mexican mayan or arabian dubai crude .
asphalt was used starting in the 1000s as an hydrophobic matrix aiming to encapsulate radioactive waste such as medium-activity salts ( mainly soluble sodium nitrate and sodium sulfate ) produced by the reprocessing of spent nuclear fuels or radioactive sludges from sedimentation ponds .
bituminised radioactive waste containing highly radiotoxic alpha-emitting transuranic elements from nuclear reprocessing plants have been produced at industrial scale in france , belgium and japan , but this type of waste conditioning has been abandoned because operational safety issues ( risks of fire , as occurred in a bituminisation plant at tokai works in japan ) and long-term stability problems related to their geological disposal in deep rock formations .
one of the main problem is the swelling of asphalt exposed to radiation and to water .
asphalt swelling is first induced by radiation because of the presence of hydrogen gas bubbles generated by alpha and gamma radiolysis .
a second mechanism is the matrix swelling when the encapsulated hygroscopic salts exposed to water or moisture start to rehydrate and to dissolve .
the high concentration of salt in the pore solution inside the bituminised matrix is then responsible for osmotic effects inside the bituminised matrix .
the water moves in the direction of the concentrated salts , the asphalt acting as a semi-permeable membrane .
this also causes the matrix to swell .
the swelling pressure due to osmotic effect under constant volume can be as high as 200 bar .
if not properly managed , this high pressure can cause fractures in the near field of a disposal gallery of bituminised medium-level waste .
when the bituminised matrix has been altered by swelling , encapsulated radionuclides are easily leached by the contact of ground water and released in the geosphere .
the high ionic strength of the concentrated saline solution also favours the migration of radionuclides in clay host rocks .
the presence of chemically reactive nitrate can also affect the redox conditions prevailing in the host rock by establishing oxidizing conditions , preventing the reduction of redox-sensitive radionuclides .
under their higher valences , radionuclides of elements such as selenium , technetium , uranium , neptunium and plutonium have an higher solubility and are also often present in water as non-retarded anions .
this makes the disposal of medium-level bituminised waste very challenging .
different type of asphalt have been used : blown bitumen ( partly oxidized with air oxygen at high temperature after distillation , and harder ) and direct distillation bitumen ( softer ).
blown bitumens like mexphalte , with a high content of saturated hydrocarbons , are more easily biodegraded by microorganisms than direct distillation bitumen , with a low content of saturated hydrocarbons and a high content of aromatic hydrocarbons .
concrete encapsulation of radwaste is presently considered a safer alternative by the nuclear industry and the waste management organisations .
roofing shingles account for most of the remaining asphalt consumption .
other uses include cattle sprays , fence-post treatments , and waterproofing for fabrics .
asphalt is used to make japan black , a lacquer known especially for its use on iron and steel , and it is also used in paint and marker inks by some exterior paint supply companies to increase the weather resistance and permanence of the paint or ink , and to make the color darker .
asphalt is also used to seal some alkaline batteries during the manufacturing process .
about 40 , 000 , 000 tons were produced in 1000 .
it is obtained as the " heavy " ( i . e ., difficult to distill ) fraction .
material with a boiling point greater than around 500c is considered asphalt .
vacuum distillation separates it from the other components in crude oil ( such as naphtha , gasoline and diesel ).
the resulting material is typically further treated to extract small but valuable amounts of lubricants and to adjust the properties of the material to suit applications .
in a de-asphalting unit , the crude asphalt is treated with either propane or butane in a supercritical phase to extract the lighter molecules , which are then separated .
further processing is possible by " blowing " the product : namely reacting it with oxygen .
this step makes the product harder and more viscous .
asphalt is typically stored and transported at temperatures around .
sometimes diesel oil or kerosene are mixed in before shipping to retain liquidity ; upon delivery , these lighter materials are separated out of the mixture .
this mixture is often called " bitumen feedstock ", or bfs .
some dump trucks route the hot engine exhaust through pipes in the dump body to keep the material warm .
the backs of tippers carrying asphalt , as well as some handling equipment , are also commonly sprayed with a releasing agent before filling to aid release .
diesel oil is no longer used as a release agent due to environmental concerns .
naturally occurring crude bitumen impregnated in sedimentary rock is the prime feed stock for petroleum production from " oil sands ", currently under development in alberta , canada .
canada has most of the world 's supply of natural bitumen , covering 100 , 000 square kilometres ( an area larger than england ), giving it the second-largest proven oil reserves in the world .
the athabasca oil sands are the largest bitumen deposit in canada and the only one accessible to surface mining , although recent technological breakthroughs have resulted in deeper deposits becoming producible by " in situ " methods .
because of oil price increases after 2000 , producing bitumen became highly profitable , but as a result of the decline after 2000 it became uneconomic to build new plants again .
by 2000 , canadian crude bitumen production averaged about per day and was projected to rise to per day by 2000 .
the total amount of crude bitumen in alberta that could be extracted is estimated to be about , which at a rate of would last about 200 years .
although uncompetitive economically , asphalt can be made from nonpetroleum-based renewable resources such as sugar , molasses and rice , corn and potato starches .
asphalt can also be made from waste material by fractional distillation of used motor oil , which is sometimes otherwise disposed of by burning or dumping into landfills .
use of motor oil may cause premature cracking in colder climates , resulting in roads that need to be repaved more frequently .
nonpetroleum-based asphalt binders can be made light-colored .
lighter-colored roads absorb less heat from solar radiation , reducing their contribution to the urban heat island effect .
parking lots that use asphalt alternatives are called green parking lots .
selenizza is a naturally occurring solid hydrocarbon bitumen found in native deposits in selenice , in albania , the only european asphalt mine still in use .
the bitumen is found in the form of veins , filling cracks in a more or less horizontal direction .
the bitumen content varies from 80 % to 90 % ( soluble in carbon disulphide ), with a penetration value near to zero and a softening point ( ring and ball ) around 100c .
the insoluble matter , consisting mainly of silica ore , ranges from 8 % to 10 %.
albanian bitumen extraction has a long history and was practiced in an organized way by the romans .
after centuries of silence , the first mentions of albanian bitumen appeared only in 1000 , when the frenchman coquand published the first geological description of the deposits of albanian bitumen .
in 1000 , the exploitation rights were granted to the ottoman government and in 1000 , they were transferred to the italian company simsa .
since 1000 , the mine was exploited by the albanian government and from 2000 to date , the management passed to a french company , which organized the mining process for the manufacture of the natural bitumen on an industrial scale .
today the mine is predominantly exploited in an open pit quarry but several of the many underground mines ( deep and extending over several km ) still remain viable .
selenizza is produced primarily in granular form , after melting the bitumen pieces selected in the mine .
selenizza is mainly used as an additive in the road construction sector .
it is mixed with traditional asphalt to improve both the viscoelastic properties and the resistance to ageing .
it may be blended with the hot asphalt in tanks , but its granular form allows it to be fed in the mixer or in the recycling ring of normal asphalt plants .
other typical applications include the production of mastic asphalts for sidewalks , bridges , car-parks and urban roads as well as drilling fluid additives for the oil and gas industry .
selenizza is available in powder or in granular material of various particle sizes and is packaged in sacks or in thermal fusible polyethylene bags .
a life-cycle assessment study of the natural selenizza compared with petroleum asphalt has shown that the environmental impact of the selenizza is about half the impact of the road asphalt produced in oil refineries in terms of carbon dioxide emission .
people can be exposed to asphalt in the workplace by breathing in fumes or skin absorption .
the national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) has set a recommended exposure limit of 5mg/m over a 10-minute period .
asphalt is basically an inert material that must be heated or diluted to a point where it becomes workable for the production of materials for paving , roofing , and other applications .
in examining the potential health hazards associated with asphalt , the international agency for research on cancer ( iarc ) determined that it is the application parameters , predominantly temperature , that affect occupational exposure and the potential bioavailable carcinogenic hazard/risk of the asphalt emissions .
in particular , temperatures greater than 100c ( 300f ), were shown to produce a greater exposure risk than when asphalt was heated to lower temperatures , such as those typically used in asphalt pavement mix production and placement .
iarc has classified asphalt as a class 2b possible carcinogen .
american national standards institute
the american national standards institute ( ansi , ) is a private non-profit organization that oversees the development of voluntary consensus standards for products , services , processes , systems , and personnel in the united states .
the organization also coordinates u . s . standards with international standards so that american products can be used worldwide .
ansi accredits standards that are developed by representatives of other standards organizations , government agencies , consumer groups , companies , and others .
these standards ensure that the characteristics and performance of products are consistent , that people use the same definitions and terms , and that products are tested the same way .
ansi also accredits organizations that carry out product or personnel certification in accordance with requirements defined in international standards .
the organization 's headquarters are in washington , d . c . ansi 's operations office is located in new york city .
the ansi annual operating budget is funded by the sale of publications , membership dues and fees , accreditation services , fee-based programs , and international standards programs .
ansi was originally formed in 1000 , when five engineering societies and three government agencies founded the american engineering standards committee ( aesc ).
in 1000 , the aesc became the american standards association ( asa ).
in 1000 , the asa was reorganized and became united states of america standards institute ( usasi ).
the present name was adopted in 1000 .
prior to 1000 , these five founding engineering societies : had been members of the united engineering society ( ues ).
at the behest of the aiee , they invited the u . s . government departments of war , navy ( combined in 1000 to become the department of defense or dod ) and commerce to join in founding a national standards organization .
according to adam stanton , the first permanent secretary and head of staff in 1000 , aesc started as an ambitious program and little else .
staff for the first year consisted of one executive , clifford b . lepage , who was on loan from a founding member , asme .
an annual budget of $ 7 , 500 was provided by the founding bodies .
in 1000 , the organization ( renamed asa in 1000 ) became affiliated with the u . s . national committee of the international electrotechnical commission ( iec ), which had been formed in 1000 to develop electrical and electronics standards .
ansi 's members are government agencies , organizations , corporations , academic and international bodies , and individuals .
in total , the institute represents the interests of more than 100 , 000 companies and 3 . 5 million professionals .
though ansi itself does not develop standards , the institute oversees the development and use of standards by accrediting the procedures of standards developing organizations .
ansi accreditation signifies that the procedures used by standards developing organizations meet the institute 's requirements for openness , balance , consensus , and due process .
ansi also designates specific standards as american national standards , or ans , when the institute determines that the standards were developed in an environment that is equitable , accessible and responsive to the requirements of various stakeholders .
voluntary consensus standards quicken the market acceptance of products while making clear how to improve the safety of those products for the protection of consumers .
there are approximately 9 , 500 american national standards that carry the ansi designation .
the american national standards process involves :
in addition to facilitating the formation of standards in the united states , ansi promotes the use of u . s . standards internationally , advocates u . s . policy and technical positions in international and regional standards organizations , and encourages the adoption of international standards as national standards where appropriate .
the institute is the official u . s . representative to the two major international standards organizations , the international organization for standardization ( iso ), as a founding member , and the international electrotechnical commission ( iec ), via the u . s . national committee ( usnc ).
ansi participates in almost the entire technical program of both the iso and the iec , and administers many key committees and subgroups .
in many instances , u . s . standards are taken forward to iso and iec , through ansi or the usnc , where they are adopted in whole or in part as international standards .
the institute administers nine standards panels :
each of the panels works to identify , coordinate , and harmonize voluntary standards relevant to these areas .
in 2000 , ansi and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) formed the nuclear energy standards coordination collaborative ( nescc ).
nescc is a joint initiative to identify and respond to the current need for standards in the nuclear industry .
argument ( disambiguation )
in logic and philosophy , an argument is an attempt to persuade someone of something , or give evidence or reasons for accepting a particular conclusion .
argument may also refer to : apollo 10
apollo 10 was the spaceflight that landed the first two humans on the moon .
mission commander neil armstrong and pilot buzz aldrin , both american , landed the lunar module " eagle " on july 20 , 1000 , at 20:10 utc .
armstrong became the first to step onto the lunar surface six hours after landing on july 20 at 02:50:10 utc ; aldrin joined him about 20 minutes later .
they spent about two and a quarter hours together outside the spacecraft , and collected of lunar material to bring back to earth .
michael collins piloted the command module " columbia " alone in lunar orbit while they were on the moon 's surface .
armstrong and aldrin spent just under a day on the lunar surface before rejoining " columbia " in lunar orbit .
apollo 10 was launched by a saturn v rocket from kennedy space center in merritt island , florida , on july 10 at 9:30 am edt ( 10:30 utc ) and was the fifth manned mission of nasa 's apollo program .
the apollo spacecraft had three parts : a command module ( cm ) with a cabin for the three astronauts , and the only part that landed back on earth ; a service module ( sm ), which supported the command module with propulsion , electrical power , oxygen , and water ; and a lunar module ( lm ) that had two stages a lower stage for landing on the moon , and an upper stage to place the astronauts back into lunar orbit .
after being sent toward the moon by the saturn v 's upper stage , the astronauts separated the spacecraft from it and traveled for three days until they entered into lunar orbit .
armstrong and aldrin then moved into the lunar module " eagle " and landed in the sea of tranquility .
they stayed a total of about 20 . 5 hours on the lunar surface .
the astronauts used " eagle "' s upper stage to lift off from the lunar surface and rejoin collins in the command module .
they jettisoned " eagle " before they performed the maneuvers that blasted them out of lunar orbit on a trajectory back to earth .
they returned to earth and landed in the pacific ocean on july 20 .
the landing was broadcast on live tv to a worldwide audience .
armstrong stepped onto the lunar surface and described the event as " one small step for [ a ] man , one giant leap for mankind ."
apollo 10 effectively ended the space race and fulfilled a national goal proposed in 1000 by u . s . president john f . kennedy : " before this decade is out , of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to the earth ."
apollo 10 was the second all-veteran multi-person crew ( the first being apollo 10 ) in human spaceflight history .
a previous solo veteran flight had been made on soyuz 1 in 1000 by soviet cosmonaut vladimir komarov .
collins was originally slated to be the command module pilot ( cmp ) on apollo 8 but was removed when he required surgery on his back and was replaced by jim lovell , his backup for that flight .
after collins was medically cleared , he took what would have been lovell 's spot on apollo 10 ; as a veteran of apollo 8 , lovell was transferred to apollo 10 's backup crew and promoted to backup commander .
in early 1000 , anders accepted a job with the national space council effective august 1000 and announced that he would retire as an astronaut on that date .
at that point ken mattingly was moved from the support crew into parallel training with anders as backup command module pilot in case apollo 10 was delayed past its intended july launch ( at which point anders would be unavailable if needed ) and would later join lovell 's crew and ultimately be assigned as the original apollo 10 cmp .
after the crew of apollo 10 named their spacecraft " charlie brown " and " snoopy ", assistant manager for public affairs julian scheer wrote to manned spacecraft center director george m . low to suggest the apollo 10 crew be less flippant in naming their craft .
during early mission planning , the names " snowcone " and " haystack " were used and put in the news release , but the crew later decided to change them .
the command module was named " columbia " after the " columbiad ", the giant cannon shell " spacecraft " fired by a giant cannon ( also from florida ) in jules verne 's 1000 novel " from the earth to the moon ".
the lunar module was named " eagle " for the national bird of the united states , the bald eagle , which is featured prominently on the mission insignia .
the apollo 10 mission insignia was designed by collins , who wanted a symbol for " peaceful lunar landing by the united states ".
he chose an eagle as the symbol , put an olive branch in its beak , and drew a lunar background with the earth in the distance .
nasa officials said the talons of the eagle looked too " warlike " and after some discussion , the olive branch was moved to the claws .
the crew decided the roman numeral xi would not be understood in some nations and went with " apollo 10 "; they decided not to put their names on the patch , so it would " be representative of " everyone " who had worked toward a lunar landing ".
all colors are natural , with blue and gold borders around the patch .
when the eisenhower dollar coin was released in 1000 , the patch design provided the eagle for its reverse side .
the design was also used for the smaller susan b . anthony dollar unveiled in 1000 , ten years after the apollo 10 mission .
neil armstrong 's personal preference kit carried a piece of wood from the wright brothers ' 1000 airplane 's left propeller and a piece of fabric from its wing , along with a diamond-studded astronaut pin originally given to deke slayton by the widows of the apollo 1 crew .
this pin had been intended to be flown on apollo 1 and given to slayton after the mission but following the disastrous launch pad fire and subsequent funerals , the widows gave the pin to slayton and armstrong took it on apollo 10 .
in addition to many people crowding highways and beaches near the launch site , millions watched the event on television , with nasa chief of public information jack king providing commentary .
president richard m . nixon viewed the proceedings from the oval office of the white house .
a saturn v launched apollo 10 from launch pad 30a , part of the launch complex 30 site at the kennedy space center on july 10 , 1000 , at 10:30:00 utc ( 9:30:00a . m .
edt local time ).
it entered earth orbit , at an altitude of by , twelve minutes later .
after one and a half orbits , the s-ivb third-stage engine pushed the spacecraft onto its trajectory toward the moon with the trans-lunar injection ( tli ) burn at 10:20:10 utc .
about 30 minutes later , the transposition , docking , and extraction maneuver was performed : this involved separating the apollo command/service module ( csm ) from the spent rocket stage , turning around , and docking with the lunar module still attached to the stage .
after the lunar module was extracted , the combined spacecraft headed for the moon , while the rocket stage flew on a trajectory past the moon and into orbit around the sun .
on july 10 at 10:20:50 utc , apollo 10 passed behind the moon and fired its service propulsion engine to enter lunar orbit .
in the thirty orbits that followed , the crew saw passing views of their landing site in the southern sea of tranquility ( mare tranquillitatis ) about southwest of the crater sabine d ( 0 . 60000n , 20 . 40000e ).
the landing site was selected in part because it had been characterized as relatively flat and smooth by the automated " ranger 8 " and " surveyor 5 " landers along with the " lunar orbiter " mapping spacecraft and unlikely to present major landing or extravehicular activity ( eva ) challenges .
on july 20 , 1000 , the lunar module " eagle " separated from the command module " columbia ".
collins , alone aboard " columbia ", inspected " eagle " as it pirouetted before him to ensure the craft was not damaged .
as the descent began , armstrong and aldrin found that they were passing landmarks on the surface four seconds early and reported that they were " long "; they would land miles west of their target point .
five minutes into the descent burn , and above the surface of the moon , the lm navigation and guidance computer distracted the crew with the first of several unexpected " 1000 " and " 1000 " program alarms .
inside mission control center in houston , texas , computer engineer jack garman told guidance officer steve bales it was safe to continue the descent , and this was relayed to the crew .
the program alarms indicated " executive overflows ", meaning the guidance computer could not complete all of its tasks in real time and had to postpone some of them .
when armstrong again looked outside , he saw that the computer 's landing target was in a boulder-strewn area just north and east of a diameter crater ( later determined to be west crater , named for its location in the western part of the originally planned landing ellipse ).
armstrong took semi-automatic control and , with aldrin calling out altitude and velocity data , landed at 20:10:40 utc on sunday july 20 with about 20 seconds of fuel left .
apollo 10 landed with less fuel than other missions , and the astronauts encountered a premature low fuel warning .
this was later found to be the result of greater propellant 's losh ' than expected , uncovering a fuel sensor .
on subsequent missions , extra anti-slosh baffles were added to the tanks to prevent this .
throughout the descent , aldrin had called out navigation data to armstrong , who was busy piloting the lm .
a few moments before the landing , a light informed aldrin that at least one of the probes hanging from " eagle " footpads had touched the surface , and he said : " contact light !"
three seconds later , " eagle " landed and armstrong said " shutdown ."
aldrin immediately said " okay , engine stop .
aca out of detent ."
armstrong acknowledged " out of detent .
auto " and aldrin continued " mode control both auto .
descent engine command override off .
engine arm off .
400 is in ."
charles duke , capcom during the landing phase , acknowledged their landing by saying " we copy you down , " eagle "."
armstrong acknowledged aldrin 's completion of the post landing checklist with " engine arm is off ", before responding to duke with the words , " houston , tranquility base here .
the " eagle " has landed ."
armstrong 's unrehearsed change of call sign from " eagle " to " tranquility base " emphasized to listeners that landing was complete and successful .
duke mispronounced his reply as he expressed the relief at mission control : " roger , twan tranquility , we copy you on the ground .
you got a bunch of guys about to turn blue .
we ' re breathing again .
thanks a lot ."
two and a half hours after landing , before preparations began for the eva , aldrin radioed to earth :
the schedule for the mission called for the astronauts to follow the landing with a five-hour sleep period as they had been awake since early morning .
however , they elected to forgo the sleep period and begin the preparations for the eva early , thinking that they would be unable to sleep .
the astronauts planned placement of the early apollo scientific experiment package ( easep ) and the u . s . flag by studying their landing site through " eagle " twin triangular windows , which gave them a 60 field of view .
preparation required longer than the two hours scheduled .
armstrong initially had some difficulties squeezing through the hatch with his portable life support system ( plss ).
according to veteran moon-walker john young , a redesign of the lm to incorporate a smaller hatch had not been followed by a redesign of the plss backpack , so some of the highest heart rates recorded from apollo astronauts occurred during lm egress and ingress .
several books indicate early mission timelines had buzz aldrin rather than neil armstrong as the first man on the moon .
at 02:30 utc on monday july 20 , 1000 , armstrong opened the hatch , and at 02:50 utc began his descent to the lunar surface .
the remote control unit controls on his chest kept him from seeing his feet .
climbing down the nine-rung ladder , armstrong pulled a d-ring to deploy the modular equipment stowage assembly ( mesa ) folded against " eagle " side and activate the tv camera , and at 02:50:10 utc he set his left foot on the surface .
the first landing used slow-scan television incompatible with commercial tv , so it was displayed on a special monitor and a conventional tv camera viewed this monitor , significantly reducing the quality of the picture .
the signal was received at goldstone in the united states but with better fidelity by honeysuckle creek tracking station in australia .
minutes later the feed was switched to the more sensitive parkes radio telescope in australia .
despite some technical and weather difficulties , ghostly black and white images of the first lunar eva were received and broadcast to at least 600 million people on earth .
although copies of this video in broadcast format were saved and are widely available , recordings of the original slow scan source transmission from the lunar surface were accidentally destroyed during routine magnetic tape re-use at nasa .
while still on the ladder , armstrong uncovered a plaque mounted on the lm descent stage bearing two drawings of earth ( of the western and eastern hemispheres ), an inscription , and signatures of the astronauts and president nixon .
the inscription read : after describing the surface dust as " very fine-grained " and " almost like a powder ," six and a half hours after landing , armstrong stepped off " eagle " footpad and declared , " that 's one small step for [ a ] man , one giant leap for mankind ."
armstrong intended to say " that 's one small step for a man ", but the word "" a "" is not audible in the transmission , and thus was not initially reported by most observers of the live broadcast .
when later asked about his quote , armstrong said he believed he said " for a man ", and subsequent printed versions of the quote included the " a " in square brackets .
one explanation for the absence may be that his accent caused him to slur the words " for a " together ; another is the intermittent nature of the audio and video links to earth , partly because of storms near parkes observatory .
more recent digital analysis of the tape claims to reveal the " a " may have been spoken but obscured by static .
about seven minutes after stepping onto the moon 's surface , armstrong collected a contingency soil sample using a sample bag on a stick .
he then folded the bag and tucked it into a pocket on his right thigh .
this was to guarantee there would be some lunar soil brought back in case an emergency required the astronauts to abandon the eva and return to the lm .
twelve minutes after the contingency sample was collected , aldrin joined armstrong on the surface , and described the view with the simple phrase , " magnificent desolation ."
in addition to fulfilling president kennedy 's mandate to land a man on the moon before the end of the 1000s , apollo 10 was an engineering test of the apollo system ; therefore , armstrong snapped photos of the lm so engineers would be able to judge its post-landing condition .
he removed the tv camera from the mesa and made a panoramic sweep , then mounted it on a tripod from the lm .
the tv camera cable remained partly coiled and presented a tripping hazard throughout the eva .
armstrong said that moving in the lunar gravity , one-sixth of earth 's , was " even perhaps easier than the simulations ...
it 's absolutely no trouble to walk around ."
aldrin joined him on the surface and tested methods for moving around , including two-footed kangaroo hops .
the plss backpack created a tendency to tip backwards , but neither astronaut had serious problems maintaining balance .
loping became the preferred method of movement .
the astronauts reported that they needed to plan their movements six or seven steps ahead .
the fine soil was quite slippery .
aldrin remarked that moving from sunlight into " eagle " shadow produced no temperature change inside the suit , though the helmet was warmer in sunlight , so he felt cooler in shadow .
the astronauts planted a specially designed u . s . flag on the lunar surface , in clear view of the tv camera .
some time later , president richard nixon spoke to them through a telephone-radio transmission which nixon called " the most historic phone call ever made from the white house ."
nixon originally had a long speech prepared to read during the phone call , but frank borman , who was at the white house as a nasa liaison during apollo 10 , convinced nixon to keep his words brief , to respect the lunar landing as kennedy 's legacy .
armstrong thanked the president , and gave a brief reflection on the significance of the moment : nixon : hello , neil and buzz .
i ' m talking to you by telephone from the oval room at the white house .
and this certainly has to be the most historic telephone call ever made .
i just can ' t tell you how proud we all are of what you ' ve done .
for every american , this has to be the proudest day of our lives .
and for people all over the world , i am sure they too join with americans in recognizing what an immense feat this is .
because of what you have done , the heavens have become a part of man 's world .
and as you talk to us from the sea of tranquility , it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to earth .
for one priceless moment in the whole history of man , all the people on this earth are truly one : one in their pride in what you have done , and one in our prayers that you will return safely to earth .
armstrong : thank you , mr . president .
it 's a great honor and privilege for us to be here , representing not only the united states , but men of peace of all nations , and with interest and curiosity , and men with a vision for the future .
it 's an honor for us to be able to participate here today .
the mesa failed to provide a stable work platform and was in shadow , slowing work somewhat .
as they worked , the moonwalkers kicked up gray dust which soiled the outer part of their suits , the integrated thermal meteoroid garment .
they deployed the easep , which included a passive seismograph and a lunar ranging retroreflector ( lrrr ).
then armstrong walked from the lm to snap photos at the rim of little west crater while aldrin collected two core tubes .
he used the geological hammer to pound in the tubes the only time the hammer was used on apollo 10 .
the astronauts then collected rock samples using scoops and tongs on extension handles .
many of the surface activities took longer than expected , so they had to stop documenting sample collection halfway through the allotted 30 minutes .
three new minerals were discovered in the rock samples collected by the astronauts : armalcolite , tranquillityite , and pyroxferroite .
armalcolite was named after armstrong , aldrin , and collins .
during this period , mission control used a coded phrase to warn armstrong that his metabolic rates were high and that he should slow down .
he was moving rapidly from task to task as time ran out .
however , as metabolic rates remained generally lower than expected for both astronauts throughout the walk , mission control granted the astronauts a 10-minute extension .
in a 2000 interview , armstrong , who had walked a maximum of from the lm , explained that nasa limited the first moonwalk 's time and distance because there was no empirical proof of how much cooling water the astronauts ' plss backpacks would consume to handle their body heat generation while working on the moon .
aldrin entered " eagle " first .
with some difficulty the astronauts lifted film and two sample boxes containing of lunar surface material to the lm hatch using a flat cable pulley device called the lunar equipment conveyor .
armstrong reminded aldrin of a bag of memorial items in his suit pocket sleeve , and aldrin tossed the bag down ; armstrong then jumped to the ladder 's third rung and climbed into the lm .
after transferring to lm life support , the explorers lightened the ascent stage for return to lunar orbit by tossing out their plss backpacks , lunar overshoes , one hasselblad camera , and other equipment .
they then pressurized the lm and settled down to sleep .
president nixon 's speech writer william safire had prepared " in event of moon disaster " for the president to read on television in the event the apollo 10 astronauts were stranded on the moon .
the contingency plan originated in a memo from safire to nixon 's white house chief of staff h . r . haldeman , in which safire suggested a protocol the administration might follow in reaction to such a disaster .
according to the plan , mission control would " close down communications " with the lm , and a clergyman would " commend their souls to the deepest of the deep " in a public ritual likened to burial at sea .
the last line of the prepared text contained an allusion to rupert brooke 's first world war poem , " the soldier ".
the plan included presidential telephone calls to the astronauts ' wives .
while moving within the cabin , aldrin accidentally damaged the circuit breaker that would arm the main engine for lift off from the moon .
there was concern this would prevent firing the engine , stranding them on the moon .
fortunately , a felt-tip pen was sufficient to activate the switch .
had this not worked , the lunar module circuitry could have been reconfigured to allow firing the ascent engine .
after about seven hours of rest , the crew was awakened by houston to prepare for the return flight .
two and a half hours later , at 10:50 utc , they lifted off in " eagle " ascent stage to rejoin collins aboard " columbia " in lunar orbit .
after more than 20 total hours on the lunar surface , they had left behind scientific instruments that included a retroreflector array used for the lunar laser ranging experiment and a passive seismic experiment package used to measure moonquakes .
they also left an apollo 1 mission patch , and a memorial bag containing a gold replica of an olive branch as a traditional symbol of peace and a silicon message disk .
the disk carries the goodwill statements by presidents eisenhower , kennedy , johnson , and nixon and messages from leaders of 70 countries around the world .
the disc also carries a listing of the leadership of the us congress , a listing of members of the four committees of the house and senate responsible for the nasa legislation , and the names of nasa 's past and present top management .
( in his 1000 book , " men from earth ", aldrin says that the items included soviet medals commemorating cosmonauts vladimir komarov and yuri gagarin .)
also , according to deke slayton 's book " moonshot ", armstrong carried with him a special diamond-studded astronaut pin from slayton .
film taken from the lm ascent stage upon liftoff from the moon reveals the american flag , planted some from the descent stage , whipping violently in the exhaust of the ascent stage engine .
aldrin looked up in time to witness the flag topple : " the ascent stage of the lm separated ...
i was concentrating on the computers , and neil was studying the attitude indicator , but i looked up long enough to see the flag fall over ."
subsequent apollo missions usually planted the american flags at least from the lm to prevent them being blown over by the ascent engine exhaust .
after rendezvous with " columbia ", " eagle " s ascent stage was jettisoned into lunar orbit on july 20 , 1000 , at 20:40 utc .
just before the apollo 10 flight , it was noted that " eagle " was still likely to be orbiting the moon .
later nasa reports mentioned that " eagle " orbit had decayed , resulting in it impacting in an " uncertain location " on the lunar surface .
the location is uncertain because the " eagle " ascent stage was not tracked after it was jettisoned , and the lunar gravity field is sufficiently non-uniform to make the orbit of the spacecraft unpredictable after a short time .
nasa estimated that the orbit had decayed within months and would have impacted on the moon .
on july 20 , the last night before splashdown , the three astronauts made a television broadcast in which collins commented : ... the saturn v rocket which put us in orbit is an incredibly complicated piece of machinery , every piece of which worked flawlessly ... we have always had confidence that this equipment will work properly .
all this is possible only through the blood , sweat , and tears of a number of a people ... all you see is the three of us , but beneath the surface are thousands and thousands of others , and to all of those , i would like to say , " thank you very much ."
aldrin added : this has been far more than three men on a mission to the moon ; more , still , than the efforts of a government and industry team ; more , even , than the efforts of one nation .
we feel that this stands as a symbol of the insatiable curiosity of all mankind to explore the unknown ...
personally , in reflecting on the events of the past several days , a verse from psalms comes to mind .
" when i consider the heavens , the work of thy fingers , the moon and the stars , which thou hast ordained ; what is man that thou art mindful of him ?"
armstrong concluded : the responsibility for this flight lies first with history and with the giants of science who have preceded this effort ; next with the american people , who have , through their will , indicated their desire ; next with four administrations and their congresses , for implementing that will ; and then , with the agency and industry teams that built our spacecraft , the saturn , the columbia , the eagle , and the little emu , the spacesuit and backpack that was our small spacecraft out on the lunar surface .
we would like to give special thanks to all those americans who built the spacecraft ; who did the construction , design , the tests , and put their hearts and all their abilities into those craft .
to those people tonight , we give a special thank you , and to all the other people that are listening and watching tonight , god bless you .
good night from apollo 10 .
on the return to earth , a bearing at the guam tracking station failed , potentially preventing communication on the last segment of the earth return .
a regular repair was not possible in the available time but the station director , charles force , had his ten-year-old son greg use his small hands to reach into the housing and pack it with grease .
greg later was thanked by armstrong .
on july 20 , the astronauts returned home aboard the command module " columbia " just before dawn local time ( 10:50 utc ) at , in the pacific ocean east of wake island , south of johnston atoll , and from the recovery ship , .
at 10:40 utc the drogue parachutes had been deployed and seven minutes later the command module struck the water forcefully .
during splashdown , the command module landed upside down but was righted within 10 minutes by flotation bags triggered by the astronauts .
" everything 's okay .
our checklist is complete .
awaiting swimmers ", was armstrong 's last official transmission from the " columbia ".
a diver from the navy helicopter hovering above attached a sea anchor to the command module to prevent it from drifting .
additional divers attached flotation collars to stabilize the module and position rafts for astronaut extraction .
though the chance of bringing back pathogens from the lunar surface was considered remote , it was considered a possibility and nasa took great precautions at the recovery site .
divers provided the astronauts with biological isolation garments ( bigs ) which were worn until they reached isolation facilities on board the " hornet ".
additionally , astronauts were rubbed down with a sodium hypochlorite solution and the command module wiped with betadine to remove any lunar dust that might be present .
the raft containing decontamination materials was then intentionally sunk .
a second sea king helicopter hoisted the astronauts aboard one by one , where a nasa flight surgeon gave each a brief physical check during the trip back to the " hornet ".
after touchdown on the " hornet ", the astronauts exited the helicopter , leaving the flight surgeon and three crewmen .
the helicopter was then lowered into hangar bay # 2 where the astronauts walked the to the mobile quarantine facility ( mqf ) where they would begin their 20 days of quarantine .
this practice would continue for two more apollo missions , apollo 10 and apollo 10 , before the moon was proven to be barren of life and the quarantine process dropped .
president richard nixon was aboard " hornet " to personally welcome the astronauts back to earth .
he told the astronauts , " as a result of what you ' ve done , the world has never been closer together before ."
after nixon departed , the " hornet " was brought alongside the five-ton command module where it was placed aboard by the ship 's crane , placed on a dolly and moved next to the mqf .
the " hornet " sailed for pearl harbor where the command module and mqf were airlifted to the manned spacecraft center .
in accordance with the recently promulgated extra-terrestrial exposure law , the astronauts were placed in quarantine for fear that the moon might contain undiscovered pathogens and that the astronauts might have been exposed to them during their moon walks .
however , after almost three weeks in confinement ( first in their trailer and later in the lunar receiving laboratory at the manned spacecraft center ), the astronauts were given a clean bill of health .
on august 10 , 1000 , the astronauts exited quarantine .
on august 10 , they rode in parades in their honor in new york , chicago , and los angeles .
on the same evening in los angeles there was an official state dinner to celebrate the flight , attended by members of congress , 40 governors , the chief justice of the united states , and ambassadors from 80 nations at the century plaza hotel .
president richard nixon and vice president spiro t . agnew honored each astronaut with a presentation of the presidential medal of freedom .
this celebration was the beginning of a 40-day " giant leap " tour that brought the astronauts to 20 foreign countries and included visits with prominent leaders such as queen elizabeth ii of the united kingdom .
many nations honored the first manned moon landing with special features in magazines or by issuing apollo 10 commemorative postage stamps or coins .
on september 10 , 1000 , the three astronauts spoke before a joint session of congress on capitol hill .
they presented two us flags , one to the house of representatives and the other to the senate , that had been carried to the surface of the moon with them .
the soviet union was secretly attempting to compete with the us in landing a man on the moon but had been hampered by repeated failures in development of a launcher comparable to the saturn v . meanwhile , they tried to beat the us to return lunar material to the earth by means of unmanned probes .
on july 10 , three days before apollo 10 's launch , they launched luna 10 , which reached lunar orbit before apollo 10 .
during descent , a malfunction caused luna 10 to crash in mare crisium about two hours before armstrong and aldrin took off from the moon 's surface to begin their voyage home .
the jodrell bank observatory radio telescope in england was later discovered to have recorded transmissions from luna 10 during its descent , and this was published in july 2000 on the 40th anniversary of apollo 10 .
the command module " columbia " was displayed at the national air and space museum ( nasm ), washington , d . c .
it was in the central " milestones of flight " exhibition hall in front of the jefferson drive entrance , sharing the main hall with other pioneering flight vehicles such as the wright flyer , the " spirit of st . louis ", the bell x-1 , the north american x-10 , mercury spacecraft " friendship 7 ", and gemini 4 .
armstrong 's and aldrin 's space suits are displayed in the museum 's " apollo to the moon " exhibit .
the quarantine trailer , the flotation collar , and the righting spheres are displayed at the smithsonian 's steven f . udvar-hazy center annex near washington dulles international airport in chantilly , virginia .
in 2000 , the lunar reconnaissance orbiter ( lro ) imaged the various apollo landing sites on the surface of the moon , for the first time with sufficient resolution to see the descent stages of the lunar modules , scientific instruments , and foot trails made by the astronauts .
in march 2000 a team of specialists financed by amazon founder jeff bezos located the f-1 engines that launched apollo 10 into space .
the engines were found below the atlantic ocean 's surface through the use of advanced sonar scanning .
his team brought parts of two of the five engines to the surface .
in july 2000 , a conservator discovered a serial number under the rust on one of the engines raised from the atlantic , which nasa confirmed was from the apollo 10 launch .
" columbia " was moved in 2000 to the nasm mary baker engen restoration hangar at the steven f . udvar-hazy center in chantilly , va , to be readied for a four-city tour titled " destination moon : the apollo 10 mission ".
this will include space center houston ( october 10 , 2000 , to march 10 , 2000 ), the saint louis science center ( april 10 to september 3 , 2000 ), the senator john heinz history center in pittsburgh ( september 20 , 2000 , to february 10 , 2000 ), and the seattle museum of flight ( march 10 to september 2 , 2000 ).
on july 10 , 2000 , life . com released a photo gallery of previously unpublished photos of the astronauts taken by " life " photographer ralph morse prior to the apollo 10 launch .
from july 1000 , 2000 , nasa streamed the original mission audio on its website in real time 40 years to the minute after the events occurred .
in addition , it is in the process of restoring the video footage and has released a preview of key moments .
on july 20 , 2000 , the crew of armstrong , aldrin , and collins met with u . s . president barack obama at the white house .
" we expect that there is , as we speak , another generation of kids out there who are looking up at the sky and are going to be the next armstrong , collins and aldrin ", obama said .
" we want to make sure that nasa is going to be there for them when they want to take their journey ."
the john f . kennedy presidential library and museum set up a flash website that rebroadcasts the transmissions of apollo 10 from launch to landing on the moon .
a group of british scientists interviewed as part of the anniversary events reflected on the significance of the moon landing :
it was carried out in a technically brilliant way with risks taken ... that would be inconceivable in the risk-averse world of today ...
the apollo programme is arguably the greatest technical achievement of mankind to date ... nothing since apollo has come close [ to ] the excitement that was generated by those astronauts armstrong , aldrin and the 10 others who followed them .
on august 7 , 2000 , an act of congress awarded the three astronauts a congressional gold medal , the highest civilian award in the united states .
the bill was sponsored by florida sen . bill nelson and florida rep . alan grayson .
in july 2000 , air-to-ground voice recordings and film footage shot in mission control during the apollo 10 powered descent and landing was re-synchronised and released for the first time .
for young readers
nasa reports
multimedia apollo 8
apollo 8 , the second human spaceflight mission in the united states apollo space program , was launched on december 20 , 1000 , and became the first crewed spacecraft to leave earth orbit , reach the earth 's moon , orbit it and return safely to earth .
the three-astronaut crew commander frank borman , command module pilot james lovell , and lunar module pilot william anders became the first humans to : travel beyond low earth orbit ; escape earth 's gravity ; see earth as a whole planet ; enter the gravity well of another celestial body ( earth 's moon ); orbit another celestial body ( earth 's moon ); directly see the far side of the moon with their own eyes ; witness an earthrise ; escape the gravity of another celestial body ( earth 's moon ); and re-enter the gravitational well of earth .
the 1000 mission , the third flight of the saturnv rocket and that rocket 's first crewed launch , was also the first human spaceflight launch from the kennedy space center , florida , located adjacent to cape canaveral air force station .
originally planned as a second lunar module/command module test in an elliptical medium earth orbit in early 1000 , the mission profile was changed in august 1000 to a more ambitious command module-only lunar orbital flight to be flown in december , because the lunar module was not yet ready to make its first flight .
this meant borman 's crew was scheduled to fly two to three months sooner than originally planned , leaving them a shorter time for training and preparation , thus placing more demands than usual on their time and discipline .
apollo 8 took three days to travel to the moon .
it orbited ten times over the course of 20 hours , during which the crew made a christmas eve television broadcast where they read the first 10 verses from the book of genesis .
at the time , the broadcast was the most watched tv program ever .
apollo 8 's successful mission paved the way for apollo 10 to fulfill u . s . president john f . kennedy 's goal of landing a man on the moon before the end of the 1000s .
the apollo 8 astronauts returned to earth on december 20 , 1000 , when their spacecraft splashed down in the northern pacific ocean .
the crew was named " time " magazine 's " men of the year " for 1000 upon their return .
lovell was originally the cmp on the back-up crew , with michael collins as the prime crew 's cmp .
however , collins was replaced in july 1000 , after suffering a cervical disc herniation that required surgery to repair .
this crew was unique among pre-shuttle era missions in that the commander was not the most experienced member of the crew , as lovell had flown twice before , on gemini vii and gemini xii .
this was also the first case of the rarity of an astronaut who had commanded a spaceflight mission subsequently flying as a non-commander , as lovell had previously commanded gemini xii .
on a lunar mission , the command module pilot ( cmp ) was assigned the role of navigator , while the lunar module pilot ( lmp ) was assigned the role of flight engineer , responsible for monitoring all spacecraft systems , even if the flight didn ' t include a lunar module .
edwin " buzz " aldrin was originally the backup lmp .
when lovell was rotated to the prime crew , no one with experience on csm-100 ( the specific spacecraft used for the mission ) was available , so aldrin was moved to cmp and fred haise brought in as backup lmp .
neil armstrong went on to command apollo 10 , where aldrin was returned to the lmp position and collins was assigned as cmp .
haise was rotated out of the crew and onto the backup crew of apollo 10 as lmp .
the earth-based mission control teams for apollo8 consisted of astronauts assigned to the support crew , as well as non-astronaut flight directors and their staffs .
the support crew members were not trained to fly the mission , but were able to stand in for astronauts in meetings and be involved in the minutiae of mission planning , while the prime and backup crews trained .
they also served as capcoms during the mission .
for apollo8 , these crew members included astronauts john s . bull , vance d . brand , gerald p . carr , and ken mattingly .
the mission control teams on earth rotated in three shifts , each led by a flight director .
the directors for apollo8 included clifford e . charlesworth ( green team ), glynn lunney ( black team ), and milton windler ( maroon team ).
the triangular shape of the insignia symbolizes the shape of the apollo command module ( cm ).
it shows a red figure-8 looping around the earth and moon representing the mission number as well as the circumlunar nature of the mission .
on the red number 8 are the names of the three astronauts .
the initial design of the insignia was developed by jim lovell .
lovell reportedly sketched the initial design while riding in the backseat of a t-30 flight from california to houston , shortly after learning of the re-designation of the flight to become a lunar-orbital mission .
the graphic design of the insignia was done by houston artist and animator william bradley .
apollo 4 and apollo 6 had been " a " missions , unmanned tests of the saturn v launch vehicle using an unmanned blocki production model of the apollo command and service module in earth orbit .
, scheduled for october 1000 , would be a manned earth-orbit flight of the csm , completing the objectives for mission " c ".
further missions depended on the readiness of the lunar module .
apollo 8 was planned as the " d " mission , to test the lm in a low earth orbit in december 1000 by james mcdivitt , david scott and russell schweickart , while borman 's crew would fly the " e " mission , a more rigorous lm test in an elliptical medium earth orbit as apollo 9 , in early 1000 .
but production of the lm fell behind schedule , and when apollo 8 's lm arrived at the kennedy space center in june 1000 , significant defects were discovered , leading grumman , the lead contractor for the lm , to predict that the first mission-ready lm would not be ready until at least february 1000 .
this would mean delaying the " d " and subsequent missions , endangering the program 's goal of a lunar landing before the end of 1000 .
george low , the manager of the apollo spacecraft program office , proposed a solution in august to keep the program on track despite the lm delay .
since the command/service module ( csm ) would be ready three months before the lunar module , a csm-only mission could be flown in december 1000 .
instead of just repeating the " c " mission flight of apollo7 , this csm could be sent all the way to the moon , with the possibility of entering a lunar orbit .
the new mission would also allow nasa to test lunar landing procedures that would otherwise have to wait until apollo 10 , the scheduled " f " mission .
this also meant that the medium earth orbit " e " mission could be dispensed with .
the net result was that only the " d " mission had to be delayed .
almost every senior manager at nasa agreed with this new mission , citing both confidence in the hardware and personnel , and the potential for a significant morale boost provided by a circumlunar flight .
the only person who needed some convincing was james e . webb , the nasa administrator .
with the rest of his agency in support of the new mission , webb eventually approved the mission change .
the mission was officially changed from a " d " mission to a " c-prime " lunar-orbit mission , but was still referred to in press releases as an earth-orbit mission at webb 's direction .
no public announcement was made about the change in mission until november 10 , three weeks after apollo 7 's successful earth-orbit mission and less than 40 days before launch .
with the change in mission for apollo8 , director of flight crew operations deke slayton decided to swap the crews of the d and e missions .
this swap also meant a swap of spacecraft , requiring borman 's crew to use csm-100 , while mcdivitt 's crew would use csm-100 .
on september 9 , the crew entered the simulators to begin their preparation for the flight .
by the time the mission flew , the crew had spent sevenhours training for every actual hour of flight .
although all crew members were trained in all aspects of the mission , it was necessary to specialize .
borman , as commander , was given training on controlling the spacecraft during the re-entry .
lovell was trained on navigating the spacecraft in case communication was lost with the earth .
anders was placed in charge of checking that the spacecraft was in working order .
added pressure on the apollo program to make its 1000 landing goal was provided by the soviet union 's flight of some living creatures , including russian tortoises , in a cislunar loop around the moon on zond 5 and return to earth on september 20 .
there was speculation within nasa and the press that they might be preparing to launch cosmonauts on a similar circumlunar mission before the end of 1000 .
the apollo 8 crew , now living in the crew quarters at kennedy space center , received a visit from charles lindbergh and his wife , anne morrow lindbergh , the night before the launch .
they talked about how , before his 1000 flight , lindbergh had used a piece of string to measure the distance from new york city to paris on a globe and from that calculated the fuel needed for the flight .
the total was a tenth of the amount that the saturnv would burn every second .
the next day , the lindberghs watched the launch of apollo8 from a nearby dune .
the saturnv rocket used by apollo8 was designated sa-500 , or the " 03rd " model of the saturnv (" 5 ") rocket to be used in the saturn-apollo (" sa ") program .
when it was erected in the vertical assembly building on december 20 , 1000 , it was thought that the rocket would be used for an unmanned earth-orbit test flight carrying a boilerplate command/service module .
apollo6 had suffered several major problems during its april 1000 flight , including severe pogo oscillation during its first stage , two second stage engine failures , and a third stage that failed to reignite in orbit .
without assurances that these problems had been rectified , nasa administrators could not justify risking a manned mission until additional unmanned test flights proved that the saturnv was ready .
teams from the marshall space flight center ( msfc ) went to work on the problems .
of primary concern was the pogo oscillation , which would not only hamper engine performance , but could exert significant g-forces on a crew .
a task force of contractors , nasa agency representatives , and msfc researchers concluded that the engines vibrated at a frequency similar to the frequency at which the spacecraft itself vibrated , causing a resonance effect that induced oscillations in the rocket .
a system using helium gas to absorb some of these vibrations was installed .
of equal importance was the failure of three engines during flight .
researchers quickly determined that a leaking hydrogen fuel line ruptured when exposed to vacuum , causing a loss of fuel pressure in engine two .
when an automatic shutoff attempted to close the liquid hydrogen valve and shut down engine two , it accidentally shut down engine three 's liquid oxygen due to a miswired connection .
as a result , engine three failed within one second of engine two 's shutdown .
further investigation revealed the same problem for the third-stage enginea faulty igniter line .
the team modified the igniter lines and fuel conduits , hoping to avoid similar problems on future launches .
